## CHAPTER IV.

THE HUSBAND OF AKOULKA


It was late at night, about eleven o'clock. I had been sleeping some
time and woke up with a start. The wan and weak light of the distant
lamp barely lit the room. Nearly everybody was fast asleep, even
Oustiantsef; in the quiet of the night I heard his difficult breathing,
and the rattlings in his throat with every respiration. In the
ante-chamber sounded the heavy and distant footsteps of the patrol as
the men came up. The butt of a gun struck the floor with its low and
heavy sound.

The door of the room was opened, and the corporal counted the sick,
stepping softly about the place. After a minute or so he closed the door
again, leaving a fresh sentinel there; the patrol went off, silence
reigned again. It was only then that I observed two prisoners, not far
from me, who were not sleeping, and who seemed to be holding a muttered
conversation. Sometimes, in fact, it would happen that a couple of sick
people, whose beds adjoined and who had not exchanged a word for weeks,
would all of a sudden break out into conversation with one another, in
the middle of the night, and one of them would tell the other his
history.

Probably they had been speaking for some considerable time. I did not
hear the beginning of it, and could not at first seize upon their words,
but little by little I got familiar with the muttered sounds, and
understood all that was going on. I had not the least desire for sleep
on me, so what could I do but listen.

One of them was telling his story with some warmth, half-lying on his
bed, with his head lifted and stretched towards his companion. He was
plainly excited to no little degree; the necessity of speech was on him.

The man listening was sitting up on his pallet, with a gloomy and
indifferent air, his legs stretched out flat on the mattress, and now
and again murmured some words in reply, more out of politeness than
interest, and kept stuffing his nose with snuff from a horn box. This
was the soldier Techérévin, one of the company of discipline; a morose,
cold-reasoning pedant, an idiot full of _amour propre_; while the
narrator was Chichkof, about thirty years old; this was a civilian
convict, whom up to that time I had not at all observed; and during the
whole time I was at the prison I never could get up the smallest
interest in him, for he was a conceited, heady fellow.

Sometimes he would hold his tongue for weeks together, and look sulky
and brutal enough for anything; then all of a sudden he would strike
into anything that was going on, behave insufferably, go into a white
heat about nothing at all, and tell you long stories with nothing in
them whatever about one barrack or another, blowing abuse on all the
world, and acting like a man beside himself. Then some one would give
him a hiding, and he would have another fit of silence. He was a mean
and cowardly fellow, and the object of general contempt. His stature
was low, he had little flesh on him, he had wandering eyes, though they
sometimes got mixed and seemed filled with a stupid sort of thinking.
When he told you anything he worked himself into a fever, gesticulated
wildly, suddenly broke off and went to another subject, lost himself in
fresh details, and at last forgot altogether what he was talking about.
He often got into squabbles, this Chichkof, and when he poured insult on
his adversary, he spoke with a sentimental whine and was affected nearly
to tears. He was not a bad hand at playing the _balalaika_, and had a
weakness for it; on fête days he would show you his dancing powers when
others set him at it, and he danced by no means badly. You could easily
enough make him do what you wanted ... not that he was of a complying
turn, but he liked to please and to get intimate with fellows.

For some considerable time I couldn't understand the story Chichkoff was
telling; that night I mean. It seemed to me as though he were constantly
rambling from the point to talk of something else. Perhaps he had
observed that Tchérévine was paying little attention to the narrative,
but I fancy that he was minded to overlook this indifference, so as not
to take offence.

"When he went out on business," he continued, "every one saluted him
politely, paid him every respect ... a fellow with money that."

"You say that he was in some trade or other."

"Yes; trade indeed! The trading class in my country is wretchedly
ill-off; just poverty-stricken. The women go to the river and fetch
water from ever such a distance to water their gardens. They wear
themselves to the very bone, and, for all that, when winter comes, they
haven't got enough to make a mere cabbage soup. I tell you it's
starvation. But that fellow had a good lump of land, which his labourers
cultivated; he had three. Then he had hives, and sold his honey; he was
a cattle-dealer too; a much respected man in our parts. He was very old
and quite gray, his seventy years lay heavy on his old bones. When he
came to the market-place with his fox-skin pelisse, everybody saluted
him.

"'Good-day, daddy Aukoudim Trophimtych!'

"'Good-day,' he'd return.

"'How are you getting along;' he never looked down on any one.

"'God keep you, Aukoudim Trophimtych!'

"'How goes business with you?'

"'Business is as good as tallow's white with me; and how's yours,
daddy?'

"'We've just got enough of a livelihood to pay the price of sin; always
sweating over our bit of land.'

"'Lord preserve you, Aukoudim Trophimtych!'

"He never looked down on anybody. All his advice was always worth
having; every one of his words was worth a rouble. A great reader he
was, quite a man of learning; but he stuck to religious books. He would
call his old wife and say to her, 'Listen, woman, take well in what I
say;' then he would explain things. His old Marie Stépanovna was not
exactly an old woman, if you please; it was his second wife; he had
married her to have children, his first wife had not brought him any. He
had two boys still quite young, for the second of them was born when his
father was close on sixty; Akoulka, his daughter, was eighteen years
old, she was the eldest."

"Your wife? Isn't it so?"

"Wait a bit, wait. Then Philka Marosof begins to kick up a row. Says he
to Aukoudim: 'Let's split the difference. Give me back my four hundred
roubles. I'm not your beast of burden; I don't want to do any more
business with you, and I don't want to marry your Akoulka. I want to
have my fling now that my parents are dead. I'll liquor away my money,
then I'll engage myself, 'list for a soldier; and in ten years I'll come
back here a field-marshal!' Aukoudim gave him back his money--all he
had of his. You see he and Philka's father had both put in money and
done business together.

"'You're a lost man,' that's what he said to Philka.

"'Whether I'm a lost man or not, old gray-beard, you're the biggest
cheat I know. You'd try to screw a fortune out of four farthings, and
pick up all the dirt about to do it with. I spit upon it. There you are
piling up here, digging deep there, the devil only knows why. I've got a
will of my own, I tell you. All the same I won't take your Akoulka; I've
slept with her already.'

"'How dare you insult a respectable father--a respectable girl? When did
you sleep with her, you spawn of the sucker, you dog, you hound,
you----?' said Aukoudim shaking with passion. (Philka told us all this
later).

"'I'll not only not marry your daughter, but I'll take good care that
nobody marries her, not even Mikita Grigoritch, for she's a disreputable
girl. We had a fine time together, she and I, all last autumn. I don't
want her at any price. All the money in the world wouldn't make me take
her.'

"Then the fellow went and had high jinks for a while. All the town was
as one man in sending up a cry against him. He got a lot of other
fellows round him, for he had a heap of money. Three months he had of
it. Such recklessness as you never heard of. Every penny went.

"'I want to see the end of this money. I'll sell the house; everything;
then I'll 'list or go on the tramp.'

"He was drunk from morning to evening, and went about with a carriage
and pair.

"The girls liked him well, I tell you, for he played the guitar very
nicely."

"Then it is true that he had been too well with this Akoulka?"

"Wait, wait, can't you? I had just buried my father. My mother lived by
baking gingerbread. We got our livelihood by working for Aukoudim;
barely enough to eat, a precious hard life it was. We had a bit of land
the other side of the woods, and grew corn there; but when my father
died I went on a spree. I made my mother give me money; but I had to
give her a good hiding first."

"You were very wrong to beat her; a great sin that?"

"Sometimes I was drunk the whole blessed day. We had a house that was
just tumbling to pieces with dry rot, still it was our own; we were as
near famished as could be; for weeks together we had nothing but rags to
chew. Mother nearly killed me with one stupid trick or another, but I
didn't care a curse. Philka Marosof and I were always together day and
night. 'Play the guitar to me,' he'd say, 'and I'll lie in bed the
while. I'll throw money to you, for I'm the richest chap in the world!'
The fellow could not speak without lying. There was only one thing. He
wouldn't touch a thing if it had been stolen. 'I'm no thief, I'm an
honest man. Let's go and daub Akoulka's door with pitch,[5] for I won't
have her marry Mikita Grigoritch, I'll stick to that.'

"The old man had long meant to give his daughter to this Mikita
Grigoritch. He was a man well on in life, in trade too, and wore
spectacles. When he heard the story of Akoulka's bad conduct, he said to
the old father, 'That would be a terrible disgrace for me, Aukoudim
Trophimtych; on the whole, I've made up my mind not to marry; it's to
late.'

"So we went and daubed Akoulka's door all over with pitch. When we'd
done that her folks beat her so that they nearly killed her.

"Her mother, Marie Stépanovna, cried, 'I shall die of it,' while the old
man said, 'If we were in the days of the patriarchs, I'd have hacked
her to pieces on a block. But now everything is rottenness and
corruption in this world.' Sometimes the neighbours from one end of the
street to the other heard Akoulka's screams. She was whipped from
morning to evening, and Philka would cry out in the market-place before
everybody:

"Akoulka's a jolly girl to get drunk with. I've given it those people
between the eyes, they won't forget me in a hurry.'

"Well, one day, I met Akoulka, she was going for water with her bucket,
so I cried out to her: 'A fine morning, pet Akoulka Koudimovna! you're
the girl who knows how to please fellows. Who's living with you now, and
where do you get your money for your finery?' That's just what I said to
her; she opened her eyes as wide as you please. No more flesh on her
than on a log of wood. She had only just given me a look, but her mother
thought she was larking with me, and cried from her door-step, 'Impudent
hussy, what do you mean by talking with that fellow?' And from that
moment they began to beat her again. Sometimes they hided her for an
hour together. The mother said, 'I give her the whip because she isn't
my daughter any more.'"

"She was then as bad as they said?"

"Now you just listen to my story, nunky, will you? Well, we used to get
drunk all the time with Philka. One day when I was abed, mother comes
and says:

"'What d'ye mean by lying in bed, you hound, you thief!' She abused me
for some time, then she said, 'Marry Akoulka. They'll be glad to give
her to you, and they'll give three hundred roubles with her.'

"'But,' says I, 'all the world knows that she's a bad girl----'

"'Hist, the marriage ceremony cures all that; besides, she'll always be
in fear of her life from you, so you'll be in clover together. Their
money would make us comfortable; I've spoken about the marriage already
to Marie Stépanovna, we're of one mind about it.'

"So I say, 'Let's have twenty roubles down on the spot, and I'll have
her.'

"Well, you needn't believe it unless you please, but I was drunk right
up to the wedding-day. Then Philka Marosof kept threatening me all the
time.

"'I'll break every bone in your body, a nice fellow you to be engaged,
and to Akoulka; if I like I'll sleep every blessed night with her when
she's your wife.'

"'You're a hound, and a liar,' that's what I said to him. But he
insulted me so in the street, before everybody, that I ran to Aukoudim's
and said, 'I won't marry her unless I have fifty roubles down this
moment.'"

"And they really did give her to you in marriage?"

"Me? Why not, I should like to know? We were respectable people enough.
Father had been ruined by a fire a little before he died; he had been a
richer man than Aukoudim Trophimtych.

"'A fellow without a shirt to his back like you ought to be only too
happy to marry my daughter;' that's what old Aukoudim said.

"'Just you think of your door, and the pitch that went on it,' I said to
him.

"'Stuff and nonsense,' said he, 'there's no proof whatever that the
girl's gone wrong.'

"'Please yourself. There's the door, and you can go about your business;
but give back the money you've had!'

"Then Philka Marosof and I settled it together to send Mitri Bykoff to
Father Aukoudim to tell him that we'd insult him to his face before
everybody. Well, I had my skin as full as it could hold right up to the
wedding-day. I wasn't sober till I got into the church. When they took
us home after church the girl's uncle, Mitrophone Stépanytch, said:

"'This isn't a nice business; but it's over and done now.'

"Old Aukoudim was sitting there crying, the tears rolled down on his
gray beard. Comrade, I'll tell you what I had done: I had put a whip
into my pocket before we went to church, and I'd made up my mind to have
it out of her with that, so that all the world might know how I'd been
swindled into the marriage, and not think me a bigger fool than I am."

"I see, and you wanted her to know what was in store for her. Ah,
was----?"

"Quiet, nunky, quiet! Among our people I'll tell you how it is; directly
after the marriage ceremony they take the couple to a room apart, and
the others remain drinking till they return. So I'm left alone with
Akoulka; she was pale, not a bit of colour on her cheeks; frightened out
of her wits. She had fine hair, supple and bright as flax, and great big
eyes. She scarcely ever was known to speak; you might have thought she
was dumb; an odd creature, Akoulka, if ever there was one. Well, you can
just imagine the scene. My whip was ready on the bed. Well, she was as
pure a girl as ever was, not a word of it all was true."

"Impossible!"

"True, I swear; as good a girl as any good family might wish."

"Then, brother, why--why--why had she had to undergo all that torture?
Why had Philka Marosof slandered her so?"

"Yes, why, indeed?"

"Well, I got down from the bed, and went on my knees before her, and put
my hands together as if I were praying, and just said to her, 'Little
mother, pet, Akoulka Koudimovna, forgive me for having been such an
idiot as to believe all that slander; forgive me. I'm a hound!'

"She was seated on the bed, and gazed at me fixedly. She put her two
hands on my shoulders and began to laugh; but the tears were running
all down her cheeks. She sobbed and laughed all at once.

"Then I went out and said to the people in the other room, 'Let Philka
Marosof look to himself. If I come across him he won't be long for this
world.'

"The old people were beside themselves with delight. Akoulka's mother
was ready to throw herself at her daughter's feet, and sobbed.

"Then the old man said, 'If we had known really how it was, my dearest
child, we wouldn't have given you a husband of that sort.'

"You ought to have seen how we were dressed the first Sunday after our
marriage--when we left church! I'd got a long coat of fine cloth, a fur
cap, with plush breeches. She had a pelisse of hareskin, quite new, and
a silk kerchief on her head. One was as fine as the other. Everybody
admired us. I must say I looked well, and pet Akoulka did too. One
oughtn't to boast, but one oughtn't to sing small. I tell you people
like us are not turned out by the dozen."

"Not a doubt about it."

"Just you listen, I tell you. The day after my marriage I ran off from
my guests, drunk as I was, and went about the streets crying, 'Where's
that scoundrel of a Philka Marosof? Just let him come near me, the
hound, that's all!' I went all over the market-place yelling that out. I
was as drunk as a man could be, and stand.

"They went after me and caught me close to Vlassof's place. It took
three men to get me back again to the house.

"Well, nothing else was spoken about all over the village. The girls
said, when they met in the market-place, 'Well, you've heard the
news--Akoulka was all right!'

"A little while after I do come across Philka Marosof, who said to me
before everybody, strangers to the place, too, 'Sell your wife, and
spend the money on drink. Jackka the soldier only married for that; he
didn't sleep one night with his wife; but he got enough to keep his skin
full for three years.'

"I answered him, 'Hound!'

"'But,' says he, 'you're an idiot! You didn't know what you were about
when you married--you were drunk. How could you tell all about it?'

"So off I went to the house, and cried out to them 'You married me when
I was drunk.'

"Akoulka's mother tried to fasten herself on me; but I cried, 'Mother,
you don't know about anything but money. You bring me Akoulka!'

"And didn't I beat her! I tell you I beat her for two hours running,
till I rolled on the floor myself with fatigue. She couldn't leave her
bed for three weeks."

"It's a dead sure thing," said Tchérévine phlegmatically; "if you don't
beat them they---- Did you find her with her lover?"

"No; to tell the truth, I never actually caught her," said Chichkoff
after a pause, speaking with effort; "but I was hurt, a good deal hurt,
for every one made fun of me. The cause of it all was Philka. 'Your wife
is just made for everybody to look at,' said he.

"One day he invited us to see him, and then he went at it. 'Do just look
what a good little wife he has! Isn't she tender, fine, nicely brought
up, affectionate, full of kindness for all the world? I say, my lad,
have you forgotten how we daubed their door with pitch?' I was full at
that moment, drunk as may be; then he seized me by the hair and had me
down upon the ground before I knew where I was. 'Come along--dance;
aren't you Akoulka's husband? I'll hold your hair for you, and you shall
dance; it will be good fun.' 'Dog!' said I to him. 'I'll bring some
jolly fellows to your house,' said he, 'and I'll whip your Akoulka
before your very eyes just as long as I please.' Would you believe it?
For a whole month I daren't go out of the house, I was so afraid he'd
come to us and drag my wife through the dirt. And how I did beat her for
it!"

"What was the use of beating her? You can tie a woman's hands, but not
her tongue. You oughtn't to give them a hiding too often. Beat 'em a
bit, then scold 'em well, then fondle 'em; that's what a woman is made
for."

Chichkoff remained quite silent for a few moments.

"I was very much hurt," he went on; "I began it again just as before. I
beat her from morning till night for nothing; because she didn't get up
from her seat the way I liked; because she didn't walk to suit me. When
I wasn't hiding her, time hung heavy on my hands. Sometimes she sat by
the window crying silently--it hurt my feelings sometimes to see her
cry, but I beat her all the same. Sometimes her mother abused me for it:
'You're a scoundrel, a gallows-bird!' 'Don't say a word or I'll kill
you; you made me marry her when I was drunk, you swindled me.' Old
Aukoudim wanted at first to have his finger in the pie. Said he to me
one day: 'Look here, you're not such a tremendous fellow that one can't
put you down;' but he didn't get far on that track. Marie Stépanovna had
become as sweet as milk. One day she came to me crying her eyes out and
said: 'My heart is almost broken, Ivan Semionytch; what I'm going to ask
of you is a little thing for you, but it is a good deal to me; let her
go, let her leave you, daddy Ivan.' Then she throws herself at my feet.
'Do give up being so angry! Wicked people slander her; you know quite
well she was good when you married her.' Then she threw herself at my
feet again and cried. But I was as hard as nails. 'I won't hear a word
you have to say; what I choose to do, I do, to you or anybody, for I'm
crazed with it all. As to Philka Marosof, he's my best and dearest
friend.'"

"You'd begun to play your pranks together again, you and he?"

"No, by Jove! He was out of the way by this time; he was killing himself
with drink, nothing less. He had spent all he had on drink, and had
'listed for a soldier, as substitute for a citizen body in the town. In
our parts, when a lad makes up his mind to be substitute for another, he
is master of that house and everybody there till he's called to the
ranks. He gets the sum agreed on the day he goes off, but up to then he
lives in the house of the man who buys him, sometimes six whole months,
and there isn't a horror in the whole world those fellows are not guilty
of. It's enough to make folks take the holy images out of the house.
From the moment he consents to be substitute for the son of the family
then he considers himself their patron and benefactor, and makes them
dance as he pipes, or else he goes off the bargain.

"So Philka Marosof played the very mischief at the home of this
townsman. He slept with the daughter, pulled the master of the house by
the beard after dinner, did anything that came into his head. They had
to heat the bath for him every day, and, what's more, give him brandy
fumes with the steam of the bath: and he would have the women lead him
by the arms to the bath room.[6]

"When he came back to the man's house after a revel elsewhere, he would
stop right in the middle of the road and cry out:

"'I won't go in by the door; pull down the fence!'

"And they actually _had_ to pull down the fence, though there was the
door right at it to let him in. That all came to an end though, the day
they took him to the regiment. That day he was sobered sufficiently. The
crowd gathered all through the street.

"'They're taking off Philka Marosof!'

"He made a salute on all sides, right and left. Just at that moment
Akoulka was returning from the kitchen-garden. Directly Philka saw her
he cried out to her:

"'Stop!' and down he jumped from the cart and threw himself down at her
feet.

"'My soul, my sweet little strawberry, I've loved you two years long.
Now they're taking me off to the regiment with the band playing. Forgive
me, good honest girl of a good honest father, for I'm nothing but a
hound, and all you've gone through is my fault.'

"Then he flings himself down before her a second time. At first Akoulka
was exceedingly frightened; but she made him a great bow, which nearly
bent her double.

"'Forgive me, too, my good lad; but I am really not at all angry with
you.'

"As she went into the house I was at her heels.

"'What did you say to him, you she-devil, you?'

"Now you may believe it or not as you like, but she looked at me as bold
as you please, and answered:

"'I love him better than anything or anybody in this world.'

"'I say!'

"That day I didn't utter one single word. Only towards evening I said to
her: 'Akoulka, I'm going to kill you now.' I didn't close an eye the
whole night. I went into the little room leading to ours and drank
kwass. At daybreak I went into the house again. 'Akoulka, get ready and
come into the fields.' I had arranged to go there before; my wife knew
it.

"'You are right,' said she. 'It's quite time to begin reaping. I've
heard that our labourer is ill and doesn't work a bit.'

"I put to the cart without saying a word. As you go out of the town
there's a forest fifteen versts in length. At the end of it is our
field. When we had gone about three versts through the wood I stopped
the horse.

"'Come, get up, Akoulka; your end is come.'

"She looked at me all in a fright, and got up without a word.

"'You've tormented me enough. Say your prayers.'

"I seized her by the hair--she had long, thick tresses--I rolled them
round my arm. I held her between my knees; took out my knife; threw her
head back, and cut her throat. She screamed; the blood spurted out. Then
I threw away my knife. I pressed her with all my might in my arms. I put
her on the ground and embraced her, yelling with all my might. She
screamed; I yelled; she struggled and struggled. The blood--her
blood--splashed my face, my hands. It was stronger than I was--stronger.
Then I took fright. I left her--left my horse and began to run; ran back
to the house.

"I went in the back way, and hid myself in the old ramshackle
bath-house, which we never used now. I lay myself down under the seat,
and remained hid till the dead of the night."

"And Akoulka?"

"She got up to come back to the house; they found her later, a hundred
steps from the place."

"So you hadn't finished her?"

"No." Chichkoff stopped a while.

"Yes," said Tchérévine, "there's a vein; if you don't cut it at the
first the man will go on struggling; the blood may flow fast enough, but
he won't die."

"But she was dead all the same. They found her in the evening, and she
was cold. They told the police, and hunted me up. They found me in the
night in the old bath.

"And there you have it. I've been four years here already," added he,
after a pause.

"Yes, if you don't beat 'em you make no way at all," said Tchérévine
sententiously, taking out his snuff-box once more. He took his pinches
very slowly, with long pauses. "For all that, my lad, you behaved like a
fool. Why, I myself--I came upon my wife with a lover. I made her come
into the shed, and then I doubled up a halter and said to her:

"'To whom did you swear to be faithful?--to whom did you swear it in
church? Tell me that?'

"And then I gave it her with my halter--beat her and beat her for an
hour and a half; till at last she was quite spent, and cried out:

"'I'll wash your feet and drink the water afterwards.'

"Her name was Crodotia."

FOOTNOTES:

[5] Daubing the door of a house, where a young girl lives, is done to
show that she is dishonoured.

[6] A mark of respect paid in Russia formerly, now disused.




