# Part II.




## CHAPTER I.

THE HOSPITAL


Shortly after the Christmas holidays I felt ill, and had to go to our
military hospital, which stood apart at about half a verst (one-third of
a mile) from the fortress. It was a one-storey building, very long, and
painted yellow. Every summer a great quantity of ochre was expended in
brightening it up. In the immense court-yard stood buildings, including
those where the chief physicians lived, while the principal building
contained only wards intended for the patients. There were a good many
of them, but as only two were reserved for the convicts, these latter
were nearly always full, above all in summer, so that it was often
necessary to bring the beds closer together. These wards were occupied
by "unfortunates" of all kinds: first by our own, then by military
prisoners, previously incarcerated in the guard-houses. There were
others, again, who had not yet been tried, or who were passing through.
In this hospital, too, were invalids from the Disciplinary Company, a
melancholy institution for bringing together soldiers of bad conduct,
with a view to their correction. At the end of a year or two, they come
back the most thorough-going rascals that the earth can endure.

When a convict felt that he was ill, he told the non-commissioned
officer, who wrote the man's name down on a card, which he then gave to
him and sent him to the hospital under the escort of a soldier. On his
arrival he was examined by a doctor, who authorised the convict to
remain at the hospital if he was really ill. My name was duly written
down, and towards one o'clock, when all my companions had started for
their afternoon work, I went to the hospital. Every prisoner took with
him such money and bread as he could (for food was not to be expected
the first day), a little pipe, and pouch containing tobacco, with flint,
steel, and match-paper. The convicts concealed these objects in their
boots. On entering the hospital I experienced a feeling of curiosity,
for a new aspect of life was now presented.

The day was hot, cloudy, sad--one of those days when places like a
hospital assume a particularly disagreeable and repulsive look. Myself
and the soldier escorting me went into the entrance room, where there
were two copper baths. There were two convicts waiting there with their
warders. An assistant surgeon came in, looked at us with a careless and
patronising air, and went away still more carelessly to announce our
arrival to the physician on duty. Soon the physician arrived. He
examined me, treating me in a very affable manner, and gave me a paper
on which my name was inscribed. The ordinary physician of the wards
reserved for the convicts was to make the diagnosis of my illness, to
prescribe the fitting remedies, together with the necessary diet. I had
already heard the convicts say that their doctors could not be too much
praised. "They are fathers to us," they would say.

I took my clothes off to put on another costume. Our clothes and linen
were taken away, and we were given hospital linen instead, to which were
added long stockings, slippers, cotton nightcaps, and a dressing-gown of
a very thick brown cloth, which was lined, not with linen, but with
filth. The dressing-gown was indeed very filthy, but I soon understood
its utility. We were afterwards taken to the convict wards, which were
at the head of a long corridor, very high, and very clean. The external
cleanliness was quite satisfactory. Everything that could be seen shone;
so, at least, it seemed to me, after the dirtiness of the convict
prison.

The two prisoners, whom I had found in the entrance hall, went to the
left of the corridor, while I entered a room. Before the padlocked door
walked a sentinel, musket on shoulder; and not far off was the soldier
who was to replace him. The sergeant of the hospital guard ordered him
to let me pass, and suddenly I found myself in the middle of a long
narrow room, with beds to the number of twenty-two arranged against the
walls. Three or four of them were still unoccupied. These wooden beds
were painted green, and, as is notoriously the case with all hospital
beds in Russia, were doubtless inhabited by bugs. I went into a corner
by the side of the windows. There were very few prisoners dangerously
ill and confined to their beds.

The inmates of the hospital were, for the most part, convalescents, or
men who were slightly indisposed. My new companions were stretched out
on their couches, or walking about up and down between the rows of beds.
There was just space enough for them to come and go. The atmosphere of
the ward was stifling with the odour peculiar to hospitals. It was
composed of various emanations, each more disagreeable than the other,
and of the smell of drugs; though the stove was kept well heated all day
long, my bed was covered with a counterpane, which I took off. The bed
itself consisted of a cloth blanket lined with linen, and coarse sheets
of more than doubtful cleanliness. By the side of the bed was a little
table with a pitcher and a pewter mug, together with a diminutive
napkin, which had been given to me. The table could, moreover, hold a
tea-urn for those patients who were rich enough to drink tea. These men
of means, however, were not very numerous. The pipes and the tobacco
pouches--for all the patients smoked, even the consumptive ones--could
be concealed beneath the mattress. The doctors and the other officials
scarcely ever made searches, and when they surprised a patient with a
pipe in his mouth, they pretended not to see. The patients, however,
were very prudent, and smoked always at the back of the stove. They
never smoked in their beds except at night, when no rounds were made by
the officers commanding the hospital.

Until then I had not been in any hospital in the character of patient,
so that everything was quite new to me. I noticed that my entry had
mystified some of the prisoners. They had heard of me, and all the
inmates now looked upon me with that slight shade of superiority which
recognised members of no matter what society show to one newly admitted
among them. On my right was lying down a man committed for trial--an
ex-secretary and the illegitimate son of a retired captain--accused of
having made false money. He had been in the hospital nearly a year. He
was not in the least ill, but he assured the doctors that he had an
aneurism, and he so thoroughly convinced them that he escaped both the
hard labour and the corporal punishment to which he had been sentenced.
He was sent a year later to T----k, where he was attached to an asylum.
He was a vigorous young fellow of eight-and-twenty, cunning, a
self-confessed rogue, and something of a lawyer. He was intelligent, had
easy manners, but was very presumptuous, and suffered from morbid
self-esteem. Convinced that there was no one in the world a bit more
honest or more just than himself, he did not consider himself at all
guilty, and never kept this assurance to himself.

This personage was the first to address me, and he questioned me with
much curiosity. He initiated me into the ways of the hospital; and, of
course, began by telling me that he was the son of a captain. He was
very anxious that I should take him for a noble, or at least, for some
one connected with the nobility.

Soon afterwards an invalid from the Disciplinary Company came and told
me that he knew a great many nobles who had been exiled; and, to
convince me, he repeated to me their christian names and their
patronymics. It was only necessary to see the face of this soldier to
understand that he was lying abominably. He was named Tchekounoff, and
came to pay court to me, because he suspected me of having money. When
he saw a packet of tea and sugar, he at once offered me his services to
make the water boil and to get me a tea-urn. M. D. S. K---- had promised
to send me my own by one of the prisoners who worked in the hospital,
but Tchekounoff arranged to get me one forthwith. He got me a tin
vessel, in which he made the water boil; and, in a word, he showed such
extraordinary zeal, that it drew down upon him bitter laughter from one
of the patients, a consumptive man, whose bed was just opposite mine,
Usteantseff by name. This was the soldier condemned to the rods, who,
from fear, had swallowed a bottle of vodka, in which he had infused
tobacco, this bringing on lung disease.

I have spoken of him above. He had remained silent until now, stretched
out on his bed, and breathing with difficulty. He looked at me all the
time with a very serious air. He did not take his eyes from Tchekounoff,
whose civility irritated him. His extraordinary gravity rendered his
indignation comic. At last he could stand it no longer.

"Look at this fellow! He has found his master," he said, stammering out
the words with a voice strangled by weakness, for he had now not long to
live.

Tchekounoff, much annoyed, turned round.

"Who is the fellow?" he asked, looking at Usteantseff, with contempt.

"Why, you are a flunkey," replied Usteantseff, as confidently as if he
had possessed the right of calling Tchekounoff to order.

"I a fellow?"

"Yes, you are a flunkey; a true flunkey. Listen, my good friends. He
won't believe me. He is quite astonished, the brave fellow."

"What can that matter to you? You see when they don't know how to make
use of their hands that they are not accustomed to be without servants.
Why should I not serve him, buffoon with a hairy snout?"

"Who has a hairy snout?"

"You!"

"I have a hairy snout?"

"Yes; certainly you have."

"You are a nice fellow, you are. If I have a hairy snout, you have a
face like a crow's egg."

"Hairy snout! The merciful Lord has settled your account. You would do
much better to keep quiet and die."

"Why? I would rather prostrate myself before a boot than before a
slipper. My father never prostrated himself, and never made me do so."

He would have continued, but an attack of coughing convulsed him for
some minutes. He spat blood, and a cold sweat broke out on his low
forehead. If his cough had not prevented him from speaking, he would
have continued to declaim. One could see that from his look; but in his
powerlessness he could only move his hand, the result of which was that
Tchekounoff spoke no more about the matter.

I quite understood that the consumptive patient hated me much more than
Tchekounoff. No one would have thought of being angry with him or of
looking down upon him by reason of the services he was rendering me, and
the few kopecks that he tried to get from me. Every one understood that
he did it all in order to get himself a little money.

The Russian people are not at all susceptible on such points, and know
perfectly well how to take them.

I had displeased Usteantseff, as my tea had also displeased him. What
irritated him was that, in spite of all, I was a gentleman, even with my
chains; that I could not do without a servant, though I neither asked
for nor desired one. In reality I tried to do everything for myself, in
order not to appear a white-handed, effeminate person, and not to play
the part which excited so much envy.

I even felt a little pride on this point; but, in spite of every
thing--I do not know why--I was always surrounded by officious,
complaisant people, who attached themselves to me of their own free
will, and who ended by governing me. It was I rather who was their
servant; so that, whether I liked it or not, I was made to appear to
every one a noble, who could not do without the services of others, and
who gave himself airs. This exasperated me.

Usteantseff was consumptive, and, therefore, irascible. The other
patients only showed me indifference, tinged with a shade of contempt.
They were occupied with a circumstance which now presents itself to my
memory.

I learned, as I listened to their conversation, that there was to be
brought into the hospital that evening a convict who, at that moment,
was receiving the rods. The prisoners were looking forward to this new
arrival with some curiosity. They said, however, that his punishment was
but slight--only five hundred strokes.

I looked round. The greater number of genuine patients were, as far as I
could observe, affected by scurvy and diseases of the eyes--both
peculiar to this country. The others suffered from fever, lung disease,
and other illnesses. The different illnesses were not separated; all the
patients were together in the same room.

I have spoken of genuine patients, for certain convicts had come in
merely to get a little rest. The doctors admitted them from pure
compassion, above all, if there were any vacant beds. Life in the
guard-house and in the prison was so hard compared with that of the
hospital, that many persons preferred to remain lying down in spite of
the stifling atmosphere and the rules against leaving the room.

There were even men who took pleasure in this kind of life. They
belonged nearly all to the Disciplinary Company. I examined my new
companions with curiosity. One of them puzzled me very much. He was
consumptive, and was dying. His bed was a little further on than that of
Usteantseff, and was nearly beside mine. He was named Mikhailoff. I had
seen him in the Convict Prison two weeks before, when he was already
seriously ill. He ought to have been under treatment long before, but
he bore up against his malady with surprising courage. He did not go to
the hospital until about the Christmas holidays, to die three weeks
afterwards of galloping consumption. He seemed to have burned out like a
candle. What astonished me most was the terrible change in his
countenance. I had noticed him the very first day of my imprisonment. By
his side was lying a soldier of the Disciplinary Company--an old man
with a bad expression on his face, whose general appearance was
disgusting.

But I am not going to enumerate all the patients. I just remember this
old man simply because he made an impression on me, and initiated me at
once into certain peculiarities of the ward. He had a severe cold in the
head, which made him sneeze at every moment, even during his sleep, as
if firing salutes, five or six times running, while each time he called
out, "My God, what torture!"

Seated on his bed he stuffed his nose eagerly with snuff, which he took
from a paper bag, in order to sneeze more strongly, and with greater
regularity. He sneezed into a checked cotton pocket-handkerchief which
belonged to him, and which had lost its colour through perpetual
washing. His little nose then became wrinkled in a most peculiar manner
with a multitude of wrinkles, and his open mouth exhibited broken teeth,
decayed and black, and red gums moist with saliva. When he sneezed into
his handkerchief he unfolded it and wiped it on the lining of his
dressing-gown. His proceedings disgusted me so much that involuntarily I
examined the dressing-gown I had just put on myself. It exhaled a most
offensive odour, which contact with my body helped to bring out. It
smelt of plasters and medicaments of all kinds. It seemed as though it
had been worn by patients from time immemorial. The lining had, perhaps,
been washed once, but I would not swear to it. Certainly, at the time I
put it on, it was saturated with lotions, and stained by contact with
poultices and plasters of all imaginable kinds.

The men condemned to the rods, having undergone their punishment, were
brought straight to the hospital, their backs still bleeding. As
compresses and as poultices were placed on their wounds, the
dressing-gown they wore over their wet shirt received and retained the
droppings.

During all the time of my hard labour I had to go to the hospital, which
often happened, I always put on, with mistrust and abhorrence, the
dressing-gown that was delivered to me. As soon as Tchekounoff had given
me my tea (I will say, in parenthesis, that the water brought in in the
morning, and not renewed throughout the day, was soon corrupted, soon
poisoned by the fetid air), the door opened, and the soldier, who had
just received the rods, was brought in under a double escort. I saw, for
the first time, a man who had just been whipped. Later on many were
brought in, and whenever this happened it caused great distress to the
patients. These unfortunate men were received with grave composure, but
the nature of the reception depended nearly always on the enormity of
the crime committed, and, consequently, the number of strokes
administered.

The criminals most cruelly whipped, and who were celebrated as brigands
of the first order, enjoyed more respect and attention than a simple
deserter, a recruit, like the one who had just been brought in. But in
neither case was any particular sympathy manifested, nor were any
annoying remarks made. The unhappy man was attended to in silence, above
all if he was incapable of attending to himself. The assistant-surgeons
knew that they were entrusting their patients to skilful and experienced
hands. The usual treatment consisted in applying very often to the back
of the man who had been whipped a shirt or a piece of linen steeped in
cold water. It was also necessary to withdraw skilfully from the wounds
the twigs left by the rods which had been broken on the criminal's back.
This last operation was particularly painful to the patients. The
extraordinary stoicism with which they supported their sufferings
astonished me greatly.

I have seen many convicts who had been whipped, and cruelly, I can tell
you. Well, I do not remember one of them uttering a groan. Only after
such an experience, the countenance becomes pale, decomposed, the eyes
glitter, the look wanders, and the lips tremble so that the patient
sometimes bites them till they bleed.

The soldier who had just come in was twenty-three years of age; he had a
good muscular development, and was rather a fine man, tall, well-made,
with a bronzed skin. His back, uncovered down to the waist, had been
seriously beaten, and his body now trembled with fever beneath the damp
sheet with which his back was covered. For about an hour and a half he
did nothing but walk backwards and forwards in the room. I looked at his
face: he seemed to be thinking of nothing; his eyes had a strange
expression, at once wild and timid; they seemed to fix themselves with
difficulty on the various objects. I fancied I saw him looking
attentively at my hot tea; the steam was rising from the full cup, and
the poor devil was shivering and clattering his teeth. I invited him to
have some; he turned towards me without saying a word, and taking up the
cup, swallowed the tea at one gulp, without putting sugar in it. He
tried not to look at me, and when he had finished he put the cup back in
silence without making a sign, and then began to walk up and down as
before. He was in too much pain to think of speaking to me or thanking
me. As for the other prisoners, they abstained from questioning him;
when once they had applied compresses they paid no more attention to
him, thinking probably it would be better to leave him alone, and not to
worry him by their questions and compassion. The soldier seemed quite
satisfied with this view.

Meanwhile, night came on and the lamp was lighted; some of the patients
possessed candlesticks of their own, but these were not numerous. In the
evening the doctor came round, after which a non-commissioned officer on
guard counted the patients and closed the room.

The prisoners could not speak in too high terms of their doctors. They
looked upon them truly as fathers and respected them. These doctors had
always something pleasant to say, a kind word even for reprobates, who
appreciated it all the more because they knew it was said in all
sincerity.

Yes, these kind words were really sincere, for no one would have thought
of blaming the doctors had they shown themselves cross and inhuman; they
were kind purely from humanity. They understood perfectly that a convict
who is sick has as much right to breathe pure air as any other person,
even though the latter might be a great personage. The convalescents
there had a right to walk freely through the corridors to take exercise,
and to breathe air less pestilential than that of our infirmary, which
was close and saturated with deleterious emanations. In our ward, when
once the doors had been closed in the evening, they had to remain closed
throughout the night, and under no pretext was one of the inmates
allowed to go out.

For many years an inexplicable fact troubled me like an insoluble
problem. I must speak of it before going on with my description. I am
thinking of the chains which every convict is obliged to wear, however
ill he may be; even consumptives have died beneath my eyes with their
legs loaded with irons.

Everybody was accustomed to it, and regarded it as an inevitable fact. I
do not think any one, even the doctors, would have thought of demanding
the removal of the irons from convicts who were seriously ill, not even
from the consumptive ones. The chains, it is true, were not exceedingly
heavy; they did not in general weigh more than eight or ten pounds,
which is a supportable burden for a man in good health. I have been
told, however, that after some years the legs of the convicts dry up and
waste away. I do not know whether it is true. I am inclined to think it
is; the weight, however light it may be (say not more than ten pounds),
if it is fixed to the leg for ever, increases the general weight in an
abnormal manner, and at the end of a certain time must have a disastrous
effect on its development.

For a convict in good health this is nothing, but the same cannot be
said of one who is sick. For the convicts who were seriously ill, for
the consumptive ones whose arms and legs dry up of themselves, this last
straw is insupportable. Even if the medical authorities claimed
alleviation for the consumptive patients alone, it would be an immense
benefit, I assure you. I shall be told convicts are malefactors,
unworthy of compassion; but ought increased severity to be shown towards
him on whom the finger of God already weighs? No one will believe that
the object of this aggravation is to reform the criminal. The
consumptive prisoners are exempted from corporal punishment by the
tribunal.

There must be some mysterious, important reason for all this, but what
it is, it is impossible to understand. No one believes--it is impossible
to believe--that a consumptive man will run away. Who can think of such
a thing, especially if the illness has reached a certain degree of
intensity? It is impossible to deceive the doctors and make them mistake
a convict in good health for one who is in a consumption, for this
malady is one that can be recognised at the first glance. Moreover, can
the irons prevent the convict not in good health from escaping? Not in
the least. The irons are a degradation and shame, a physical and moral
burden; but they would not hinder any one attempting to escape. The most
awkward and least intelligent convict can saw through them, or break the
rivets by hammering at them with a stone. Chains, then, are a useless
precaution; and if the convicts wear them as a punishment, should not
this punishment be spared to dying men?

As I write these lines, a face stands out from my memory: that of a
dying man, a man who died in consumption, this same Mikhailoff, whose
bed was nearly opposite me, and who expired, I think, four days after my
arrival at the hospital. When I spoke above of the consumptive patients,
I was only reproducing involuntarily the sensations and ideas which
occurred to me on the occasion of this death. I knew Mikhailoff very
little; he was a young man of twenty-five at most, not very tall, thin,
and with a fine face; he belonged to the "special section," and was
remarkable for his strange, but soft and sad taciturnity; he seemed to
have "dried up" in the convict prison, to use an expression employed by
the convicts who had a good recollection of him. I remember he had very
fine eyes. I really cannot tell why I think of that.

He died at three o'clock in the afternoon on a clear, dry day. The sun
was darting its brilliant rays obliquely through the greenish, frozen
panes of our room. A torrent of light inundated the unhappy patient, who
had lost all consciousness, and was several hours dying. From the early
morning his sight became confused; he was unable to recognise those who
approached him. The convicts would gladly have done anything to relieve
him, for they saw he was in great suffering. His respiration was
painful, deep, and irregular; his breast rose and fell violently, as
though he were in want of air; he cast his blanket and his clothes far
from him. Then he began to tear up his shirt, which seemed to him a
terrible burden. It was taken off. Then it was frightful to see this
immensely long body, with fleshless arms and legs, with beating breast,
and ribs which were as clearly marked as those of a skeleton. There was
nothing now on this skeleton but a cross and the irons, from which his
dried-up legs might easily have freed themselves. A quarter of an hour
before his death everything was silent in our ward, and the inmates
spoke only in whispers. The convicts walked on the tips of their toes.
From time to time they exchanged remarks on other subjects, and cast a
furtive glance at the dying man. The rattling in his throat grew more
and more painful. At last, with a trembling hand, he felt the cross on
his breast and endeavoured to tear it off; it was also weighing upon
him, suffocating him. It was taken off. Ten minutes afterwards, he died.
Some one then knocked at the door in order to give notice to the
sentinel; the warder entered, looked at the dead man with a vacant air,
and went away to get the assistant-surgeon. The assistant-surgeon was a
good fellow enough, but a little too much occupied with his personal
appearance, otherwise very agreeable; he soon arrived, went up to the
corpse with long strides which made a noise in the silent ward, and
felt the dead man's pulse with an unconcerned air which seemed to have
been put on for the occasion. He then made a vague gesture with his hand
and went out.

Information was given at the guard-house; for the criminal was an
important one (he belonged to the special section), and in order to
register his death it was necessary to go through some formalities.
While we were waiting for the hospital guard to come, one of the
prisoners said in a whisper, "The eyes of the defunct might as well be
closed." Another one profited by this remark, and approaching Mikhailoff
in silence, closed his eyes; then perceiving on the pillow the cross
which had been taken from his neck, he took it and looked at it, put it
down, and crossed himself. The face of the dead man was becoming
ossified; a ray of white light was playing on the surface and
illuminated two rows of white, good teeth which sparkled between his
thin lips, glued to the gums by the mouth.

The non-commissioned officer on guard arrived at last, musket on
shoulder, helmet on head, accompanied by two soldiers; he approached the
corpse, slackening his pace with an air of uncertainty. Then he examined
with a side glance the silent prisoners, who looked at him with a sombre
expression. At one step from the dead man he stopped short, as if
suddenly nailed to the spot; the naked, dried-up body, loaded with
irons, had impressed him; he undid his chin-strap, removed his helmet
(which was not at all necessary for him to do), and made the sign of the
cross; he had a gray head, the head of a soldier who had seen much
service. I remember that by his side stood Tchekounoff, an old man who
was also gray. He looked all the time at the non-commissioned officer,
and followed all his movements with strange attention. They glanced
across, and I saw that Tchekounoff also trembled. He bit and closed his
teeth, and said to the non-commissioned officer, as if involuntarily, at
the same time nodding his head in the direction of the dead man, "He had
a mother, too!"

These words went to my heart. Why had he said them? and how did this
idea occur to him? The corpse was raised with the mattress; the straw
creaked, the chains dragged along the ground with a sharp ring; they
were taken up and the body was carried out. Suddenly all spoke once more
in a loud voice. The non-commissioned officer in the corridor could well
be heard crying out to some one to go for the blacksmith. It was
necessary to take the dead man's irons off. But I have digressed from my
subject.




