ball plant danger product

So this is my first attempt to write anything about plants.

Plants are not usually shaped like balls. Plants are more shaped like leaves
and stuff, not balls. Some plants can be dangerous. That would be a story,
about dangerous plants. The product of dangerous plants. Dangerous plants
creating a product. What sort of product would a dangerous plant create? It's
hard to say. A dangerous plant would have to create some sort of trap. The
product would be the snares of its vices. Marijuana is plant, and it is a
product.

I am done talking about plants I think. Plants are dumb. They are not
dangerous. Could a plant be a villian in some sort of ridiculous story? I don't
think so. A plant antagonist. I have in my head a sort of venus fly trap of
sorts, and when the good guy of the story comes up at the end of his journey,
and he meets the venus fly trap, the trap would come up, and say something to
him. He would speak out of his thorny venus fly trap mouth, and he would say
something antagonistic. That wouldn't be dangerous though, that would just be
funny. Maybe the venus fly trap is creating a whole empire based upon the
product of his something. What industry would a venus fly trap fall into? What
would it create? Fuck if I know. I dangerous industry. An industry of drugs.

Indeed, that would be an idea, a story about some mushrooms that rise up
against the venus fly trap. The mushrooms believe in unity and oneness of all
living the things, while the venus fly trap just wants to eat flys.

I'm fixating on dangerous and plant, but I haven't talked about balls yet.
Where does the ball fit in? Is the protagonist a ball? Is the protagonist
shaped like a ball? Maybe the protaganist is fat, and he hates plants, he hates
vegatables, and he only wants to eat greasy fast food and french fries, and
someone is forcing him to eat plants, and he eats a dangerous plant and gets
sick. That would be nuts.

There is also the product of something, the product of actions. Maybe the fat
ball shaped man eats some plants and the product of that interaction is that he
becomes a danger to himself and those around him.

It's interesting, I am fixated on the word dangerous more than I am on the word
danger. I wonder what that could indicate. I guess, it is the only word there
that has more deriavatives than the others. The product is mostly just a
product.

I wonder, if there is a philogical link between the words product and
productive? I think not, but maybe? The product of something refers to the
thing that gets produced, where as being productive means that you are being
efficient in a task. I suppose being productive means that you are creating a
lot of product, so I guess that is where the root of that comes from. A
productive person will create a lot of product.

Okay, well, I don't think I will fixate on product. Maybe the plant is very
productive. Oh what a horible pun. I just realized that plant could mean either
a plant or a factory. And if there was a story about the evils of a plant, it
could parallel the evils of factory work. How stupid that would be.

A ball factory, run by an evil plant. A plant run by a plant. Oh please god,
please to do not bring to writing about an evil plant run by a plant. That
could be the comical reveal, the plant is run by an evil and dangerous plant.

Of course, the association here could be a dangerous plant, as in, factory work
is dangerous, which it certainly is, not only for the actual health of the
people involved, but also because it creates monotonous sameness in things that
takes out all of the variety of life. That could be dangerous.

But at the same time, we need uniform balls, we need some way to make things
the same. If I were to play a sport, I would want the ball that I play the
sport with to be the same. I would want it to come from a plant. But what if
someone misunderstood what I said when I said that the ball should come from a
plant. That would be a less silly and more funny version of the story. I
request a ball from a plant.

Maybe this is the story. So there is a sport, that the ancient May-incan people
used to play, and they would use a ball to play it. And when they would play,
one of the tribes would always supply the ball. And this worked all fine and
well, and people got along just dandy, until the people, the mayincans of old,
became native amer-dians, and these native amerdians wanted to create a whole
league based upon this sport, and they wanted to compete with the frechaidians
to determine who was better at the sport. But when they finally met, they were
met with a massive quandry, because the ball thet the native amerdians had was
different than the ball that the frechadians had, and usually this wouldn't be
a big deal, but they wanted to determine who was the superior at the sport, and
having a ball that was different than what they were used to would be not good.
So one of them said, "let's create a plant, a plant that makes balls, and the
balls that this plant creates we will use to in our championship game" and they
all agreed that this was a good idea. So the native amerdians, and the
frenchadians got together, and they cultivated the fields, and the cross bred
all sorts of plants. First they mixed corn with some round bulbous plant, with
onions, and this created conions, and then they put together these conions and
cross-bred them with something else, and they did this all sorts of ays, until
after many generations, (because the native amerdians and the frenchadians
cared more about their nations health than their own) they were finally able to
make a ball out of this plant. It was this venus fly trap that was able to
cough up a ball for them to play their sport, and with this ball, they decided
to decide the championship match.

And this championship match, to this day, it is forgotten who won that match,
because in the middle of it, the venus fly trap, it started to gain sentience,
and after they were done with the game, and the victor held up the ball that
they used, the venus fly trap cried out, "that is mine, you took it from me and
now you use it to play games, and it grew to a mignificent size, and it
swallowed up all of the atheletes there, all of the native amerdians and the
frenchadians, it swallowed all of them whole, with the ball too, and from this
sacrifice it is able to create more balls from everyone.

I sort of like that. The analogy of a plant that swallows people and creates
products out of their sacrifice. An evil dangerous plant that swallows people.
How silly that is. How very patently silly.

What else. I mean, surely there is more to write about. I don't know enough
about the socio political and ecomic effect of plants to write more about my
evil plant monster. I fact, I even hate myself that I have entertained the idea
of an evil plant monster all this time. I hate puns, my god, why am I doing
this to myself, this hurts me to continue to write like this.

So enough about evil plants that are actually plants. I'm done writting about
that forever now.

What happened to the frenchadians? and the native amerdians. Well, the
ameridans were killed by the spantagese people of course. Why am I combining
words like this.

I want to stop. I want to stop combining words. I don't know what more to write
about.

Perhaps this plant, this plant does not represent the effect of the factory
system on our econmic system. Perhaps it's just an evil plant.

How am I going to discuss any of this with theses people. I don't know any of
these people, and I am expected to talk to them about evil and dangeurous plant
monsters. How juvenile that is. Surely you can come up with something more
mature than that?

Once, in the land, there was an adventurer. This adventurer was shaped like a
ball, because he was fat, and because he was fat he was shaped like a ball.
He did not like that the was shaped like a ball that. He wanted to become
dangerous and mean, and become formidible and strong, so elected to eat more
plants. And as he ate plant, he looked at himself, and he said, "I am the
product of societies views towards me. If I am shaped like a ball then I should
be allowed to be shaped like a ball."

Fuck, I need more words. These words suck. I can't think of anything else about
dangerous plant balls. The product of my writing has been nothing but a big
ball of dangerous pun exploration. I can't discover anything like this. Not a
thing at all.

I am supposed to keep writing and writing without stopping, and that is what I
am doing. I feel like I have to stick to the script, but this script of plant
balls is taking me no where that I like.

I could write about smoethnig else. Let's take the opposite. What is the
opposite of a plant. Some people might say meat, but that is not true. In fact,
does plant have an opposite? There are a lot of things that are not plants, but
those would not be "the opposite" of a plant. That's an interesting thing about
some of these things. When asked what is the opposite of a vegatable, one could
say fruit, but those two things are in the same family of things. In fact, an
opposite usually is in the same family of things. Male and female are both
humans, and fruits and vegatables are both things that come off of plants. But
what is the opposite of a human? Do humans have an opposite? That's actually a
really interesting idea, the fact that there are some things that have an
opposite and something things that do not, and the things that do not have
opposites could be put into two groups of things that are opposites of
eachother.

So plant has no opposite, and could be said to be composed of a whole family of
things, and some of thoes things will be opposites of the other things in that
family. The opposite of danger is safety. But what would be the thing that both
of those things are a family of? Male, female, human. Danger, safety, state of
being? Emotion? Maybe not emotion. Not quite. Happy and sad are emotions, but
danger and saftey, those are qualities. So would that be it? Quality? But if
given the word quality, I wouldn't come up with danger and saftey, I would come
up with something like good and bad. High-quality vs low-quality. So instead,
danger and safety would be traits. The trait of something. Something could be
dangerous, something could be safe. Peculiar.

The opposite of a ball. What would be the opposite of a ball? Round and not
round. I think, are the things there. So a ball is the thing that is either
round or not. But usually a ball is defined as round. So that sort of sucks.

Here I am just going on and on about antonyms, and I don't have anything to
share. Am i going to share this with strangers? What would be the danger of
that? Fuck if I know.

What is the opposite of product? A product is something that gots produced by
something. I think product is one of those broader words, like human. A product
could either be cheap or expensive. That one is acutally pretty fundamental,
I'm satisfied with that.

I managed to type 2000 words in 45 minutes on this shitty keyboard. So that is
cool, I guess. Pretty neat, I suppose.

I guess all I have is dangerous venus fly traps that represent factories that
produce balls for the macans and the frenchaidans to play their sport with.
