# Seth and Cain (Early)
So at this point, I think it is important to tell the story of Seth and Cain.

Of course, many people know of the story between Cain and Abel. That one has
been told through the centuries, being most famous as the story of the man that
murdered his brother. However, there is a much more interesting story to be
told between the brothers Seth and Cain. Although they did not interact with
eachother, they had one encounter. In this encounter, the result was not a
murder, but instead, a mutual understanding. Because of this, this story does
not get as much attention as the Cain and Abel story, but without the Cain and
Seth story, the lineage of Seth would not be as prominant, nor as full force as
it became. It is because of this encounter that things began to take the shape
they did as Seth and his descendents began to populate the human race.

It's difficult to know exactly what when on between these two men in the cabin
that they had their conversation. In fact, because it was just the two of them,
and neither one kept a transcript of the exact words that went down, we can
only speculate through vision what might have been said. However, we will not
let this obstacle deter us in our pursuit of the truth, and we will find in our
minds eye the conversation that Seth and Cain had on that day.

Our story begins with the birth of a child. This childs name is Seth. The child
is born to the world, and in the world of this child, there are his parents,
and himelf. As the child begins to grow, he begins to learn how to tend to the
gardens. He becomes skilled at it. He also learns how to defend himself when
creatures attack. In fact, when he was merely eleven, he saw a bear coming to
attack his father as his father was weighed down by the farm equipment, and
could not defend himself. Seth grabbed the nearest sharp farmming tool, and
attacked the bear relentlessly with it. He did not kill the bear, but he warded
it off enough for his father to free himself from the equipment.

As Seth grows up, he asks questions about the world around them. Adam and Eve
are able to educate him as best they are able. They tell Seth that the cannot
remember a time before they existed in the garden. It was as if they were
suddenly brought forth into existance, and the only thing they knew was true
was that a God named Yahweh had put them there, and that they weren't supposed
to eat of a certain tree. Eve told Seth about the serpent that could talk, and
Adam told Seth about his meeting with Raphael.

From this point, they then tell Seth that, after they had eaten of the fruit,
they were fallen individuals. THey could no longer live at peace in the garden.
THey became aware of the evils of the world, and they no longer felt safe. 

"That is why," they stressed, "that if any one with any ill intentions comes to
you and tells you that you can be given the knowledge of good and evil by only
eating something, you should not believe them, but instead you should know that
those words come from the devil himself."

This all seemed reasonable to Seth. THere were no contradictions in the story,
and Seth had every reason to believe them.

Then, one day, Seth asked his parents. "So is it just us in the world? Or is
there someone else?" At this, Adam and Eve both gave a long pause, until
eventually, Adam spoke up. "Son, I think your old enough for us to tell you
what happened with your brothers."

"I have brothers!" Seth was confused and shocked. He had lived the past twelve
years thinknig that he was an only child.

"Yes," Adam replied, "You do have brothers. Or rather, you had brothers. You
see, one of them is now dead."

Adam settled in to tell the story to Seth. "So when your mother and I had to
leave the Garden of Eden, we knew that some day, our lives would come to an
end. When that happens, there will be no one left to revel in the glory of
God. We saw that we didn't want that to happen, we want there to always be
living things that can understand the glory of God. Because if that dies, then
so do we all. So we decided to have a child.

"We had a child, and we named him Cain..." Adam trailed off, "Well, Cain was a
great hunter. He could protect the farm, and bring back game. We would
sacrifice the fat of the game to God, and eat of the meat. Life was good.

"Some time after your brother Cain had become a full adult, your mother and I
decided to have another child. This one we named Abel.

"Abel and Cain got along very well as children. Cain, of course, being an
adult, helped us in raising him. Cain became something of a second Father to
Abel.

"But then something terrible happened." Adam gave pause for a moment.

Eve continued to the story. "You see, son, Cain and Abel loved eachother, but
they were very different people. Cain was a gamesman, and Abel was a farmer.
Abel was much more peaceful than your brother Cain, and saw no need of violence
or killing. One day when he became old enough, Abel confronted Cain. Abel told
Cain that there was no need to kill things as he was."

"Yes," Adam continued, "Cain and Abel got into a disagreement, and in that
disagreement, Cain killed Abel. It was horrible, it was wrong. When your mother
and I learned of this, and when we saw the body of your brother, well, what
more could we do except exile him from our house. It pains us greatly to say
it, but we can't have someone so violent as that living under our roof."

"That is when we had you, Seth," Eve finished the story. "You seem to be the
best of both of your brothers. You can work the fields, and you can defend
yourself if need be. You are to be the one chosen to take up the family when we
die."

This was a lot for Seth to take in. Just a few minutes before, he thought he
was an only child, and now he was learning that he not only had one brother,
but two, and that one of his brothers had killed the other.

After processing the story for a bit, Seth asked, "What happened to Cain? Where
is he now?"

Both Adam and Eve shrugged their shoulders. "We don't know," Eve chimed in. "We
told him to never return to this place again. We can only presume that he is
making a life for himself outside hunting game."

That was the end of the conversation. It was a lot for Seth to wrap his head
around.

For a couple of years after that, Seth continued on his life. He thought about
his brothers occasionally, but only as a passing thought, and not anything
more. He continued to maintain the crops, and protect the farm.

When Seth was fourteen, he went up to his parents, and he asked him a question.
"If I were to go out, do you think I could find my brother Cain?"

Adam and Eve glanced at eachother. They were not sure how to respond.
Eventually, Eve gave her response. "I do not think it would be wise to try and
seek out your brother. He is something of a monster, always killing. In fact,
if you were to see him, he might kill you without realizing who you are. It
would be dangerous to get near him."

Adam gave his response. "And besides, what would there be to say? He shows no
remorse for what happened. He can't be reasoned with. He rejects our God. As we
see it, he has been possessed by the devil. He is has fallen to the level of
the serpent in the tree. He cannot be saved."

Seth shook his head, and thanked his parents for their opinion. Still, he
couldn't help but think that his parents were ignoring his question. He asked
if he could find his brother Cain, not if it would be worthwhile. The way his
parents dodged the question made him think that it was possible.

However, he did not know how he would find him. What would he even look like?
He felt uneasy about the way his parents talked about Cain. If he had just so
happen to have been born first, would he have been outcast like Cain was? How
terrible that must be. It was the most terrible thing that Seth could think of.
Perhaps his brother Cain was a murderous monster, but that seemed so foreign to
him that he couldn't help but think that there must be some other reasoning
from Cain.

But still, Seth did not know how he would find Cain.

Fortunately for Seth, Cain found Seth.

One day, when Seth was working in the fields, at the very edge of the farm, he
say a man coming from the forest hail him down.

"Ahoy there!" the man yelled down from the distance. "Do I see a friendly face
in my sights."

Seth was startled at first. He replied to the man as best he could. "Hello
stranger. I see no reason to harm you if you do not harm me."

"That's enough of a friend for me." Cain continued to walk towards Seth. "What
might your name be."

"I'm Seth"

"Ah, Seth, of course. Well, my name is Cain. It's a pleasure to meet you."

Cain raised out his hand, but Seth became dreadfully chilled upon hearing the
name.

"Get away from me now!" Seth exclaimed. "I want you away from me, and I want
nothing to do with you!"

"Whoa there! Easy now." Cain replied, "I mean you no harm. For what reason do
you harbor this adversity towards me?"

Seth straightend his back and faced Cain, "My mom and dad... No... Our mom and
dad told me about you. They told me that you killed our brother and ran away,
never to show your face here again. Tell me, why are you approaching me? Do you
mean to kill me too?"

Cain eyed his brother. "Interesting, so they had another son?" He trailed his
gaze off in to the distance. "Tell me, Seth, I would like to know what Mom and
Dad have told you. Can we go into the cabin, and discuss this?"

Seth thought for a moment. Then he said, "How can I trust you? How do I know
that you're not going to kill me as soon as we get into the cavern?"

Cain gently grabbed Seth's hand in his own. It was soft, and delicate, compared
with his own. "Because if I wanted to kill you, I could do it right now."

At that moment, Seth realized that he was completely helpless to Cain. Cain had
drawn his sword, and had it poised to slice Seth at the blink of an eye.

Cain withdrew his sword. "Please, I don't want to scare you, I am merely making
a point. Now, can we go somewhere more comfortable to talk?"

Seth, having survived that first encounter with potential death at the mercy of
Cain's sword, let out a sigh of relief. Seth led Cain to a cottage towards the
edge of the farm, near the border of the farm and the forest. In the cottage,
Cain prepared some tea, and a snack for Cain to eat while they sat down. Cain
was the first to break the silence between them.

"So do you gather the crops for mother and father? Is that your day to day
life?"

Seth stumbled a bit at his reply. This was the first human he had ever talked
too besides his parents. He said, "Yes, I do manage the farms. I think I do all
right. Dad seems pleased with the crops we bring."

"Good, that's good." Cain replied. "And you can defend yourself. I saw you
fight off a bear that was going to attack dad."

"Yes..." said Seth. "How do you know about that?"

"Oh, I know more than you probably think Seth. But that one was mere
coincidence. I was roaming in the forest, and I saw the bear wandering towards
the farms. I followed it, but when it crossed the threshold into the farms, it
was no longer in my power to do anything about it. I watched as the bear
approached father, and also as you gathered a tool to defend yourself and fight
it off."

"And you were just going to stand there and let it kill dad? What sort of
monster would do that?"

"I'm not a monster." Cain sneered. "I saw you were able to handle the
situation, so I rested easy. Of course, had you not been there, I would have
been in a moral dilema, but you were there, so my dilema was solved."

"So that's what someone elses life means to you? It's just a moral dilema?"
Seth was visibly upset.

"No." Cain said resolutely. "Not at all." Cain trailed off. "What do you know
about Abel?"

Seth recoiled at the sudden shift in topic. "I don't know much, just that he
was a great farmer, and taht you killed."

Cain laughed. "Well, one of those is true. Abel was a great farmer."

Seth looked back at his brother with an accusatory glance. "And you mean to
tell me it wasn't you that killed him?"

Cain looked out the window. "If I'm being entirely repentive, then yes, I would
say that I killed him. But the horrors of the wild killed Abel more than
anything else. I was merely naive enough to assume he could handle it."

Seth looked curious now. "Tell me your story then. I want to know about my
brother Abel. What was he like before you killed him?"

Cain chuckled, "You see, I have told you that I did not kill him, but yet you
still accuse me? That is actually a good quality in a man, you will do well in
life. Much better than Abel could have. I will tell you about him.

"He was a farming man. He spent all his time out in the farms, plant seeds,
tilling soil, and pruning crops. Every waking moment of his was spent tending
to, or thinking about, the crops. When he was not farming, he was either
eating, or he was sleeping. Even in the night, he would wake up, and check on
his crops. He attended to them with a obsessive level of attention. And the
harvests were the best you could ever dream of. He grew the most full, and
bountiful bread you could ask for..."

Cain started to drift off.

"Why did you kill him?" Seth asked

"I told you, I did not kill him. Let me tell you what happened on that day from
the beginning."

Seth sat, ready to listen to what Cain had to say.

"One day," Cain began, "He and I got to discussing things, similar to how you
and I are right now. We talked about all sorts of things, from the nature of
God, to the manner in which we provide food to the family. As you probably
know, I provided the game, and Abel provided the crops.

"So as we were discussing this, Abel confronted me. He said, 'Cain, I am
morally obligated to tell you that I am against the killing that you partake
in. It think it's wrong to slaughter animals like you do for the mere pleasure
of eating the meat. We have sufficient means to provide more than enough food
to sustain the bellies of our family, as well as the bellies for many families
to come. We do not need to kill any living thing in order to satiate our
hunger. Please, Cain, stop killing animals. It's wrong.'

"So Abel said to me. To which I replied, 'Oh, my naive brother Abel. Yes, I do
hunt game, and yes, it does provide food for the family. But also, my hunting
keeps the family safe. For when you are working on the farms, I am out and
protecting the borders from the wild things that would come and destroy your
crops. You might not see it, but by killing the animals, I am protecting you
and teh family from certain doom.'

"Abel did not like this explanation, and he spoke against it. He said, 'I don't
believe you. I think our family will be able to get along just fine if you
don't kill everything around us. There must be a better way to keep us safe
besides killing everything that enters our farm.'

"I laughed at this idea. Abel had no idea what sort of danger these animals
posed. So I said to him, 'Abel, how about this. How about I take you to the
wild, and I have you confront a bear. When you confront it, you will see that
it is not a living thing, but instead a beast of the wild, and that it is meant
to be killed and taken as game.'

"So Abel agreed, on the condition that the bear was not to be killed.

"So we traveled to the forest, and we found a bear. I said to Abel, 'Look,
there is a bear. Take my weapon, and go confront it.'

"Abel, being indignant as he was, grabbed my sword, and confronted the bear. Of
course, Abel was too weak, and was trampled by the bear. I came up laughing
behind him. With a few quick strokes, I hit the vital points of the bear, and
killed it on the spot. You see, when I was first learning to hunt, I would be
trampled like this, but I always managed to find a way to survive. So I went to
lift my brother up, so that he may stand tall and we might continue our
discussion, but it came to my surprise that, when I went to grab his shoulder,
instead of pulling up my beaten brother from the ground, I found that I was
pulling up a lifeless corpse, dangling in my arms.

"How was I to know that Abel was so weak that a bear attack would outright kill
him? Even as a child, when I was first learning to grapple with animals, I was
never so weak as to let something like a wild beast actually kill me. Such an
idea was foreign to me.

"So now at this point, what was I to do? I held the lifeless corpse of my
brother in my hands. I couldn't hide it, of course, because my parents, ...,
our parents, would quickly wonder where their son had gone. So I did the only
thing I knew to do. I brought our brothers corpse to our parents and told them
what had happened.

"Mom and dad were very upset with me. They blamed me for his death, because
they argued that I could have easily save Abel from being trampled by the bear.
WHen I tried to explain that I was making a point to Abel, and that I couldn't
forsee that he was so weak as to die to a bear attack, they wouldn't have any
of it. They instead told me to stop lying to them, and admit that I killed
them.

"It's a strange thing, being told that you are lying when you are confessing
the absolute truth to the best of your ability. I could not convince them. They
were convinced that I had killed Abel, and that I was making up a story to
cover it up.

"So I was exiled. I left, and I promised them that I would never set foot on
their farm again. I suppose I have broken that promise by stepping here today,
but I am not here to confront our parents. Instead, I just wanted to make
contact with you."

Seth thought for a moment. He wasn't sure to what degree he should believe his
brothers story. He then replied, "So where does that leave you?  After all,
even if you didn't technically kill him, and I'm not saying I totally believe
your story, you were the one that placed him in the position that he died in.
His blood is still on your hands. What do you have to say for yourself there?"

Cain replied again, "As I see it, I can't dwell on what happened in the past. I
could not have known that he was so weak that he could die to a bear, and so
now I understand that not all humans are created with the same facilities as
everyone else. I understand that about you now as well. If only I had known
that about Abel at that point, I would not have told him to fight that bear,
but I could not have known that at the time. And regardless, had I not forced
him into that fight, he would have eventually run into some sort of wild
creature and failed to fight it and die. After all, I could not always be
around him to protect him, that would be silly. The man would have died by a
bear in one way or another anyway."

There was a pause in the room. Seth remained quiet for some time. After some
time, he finally broke the silence, and said, "I can see you justify your
actions now with naivity and innocence, but still let it be known that I am not
so inclined to believe you. In fact, was it not our mother who was decieved by
a sweet tongued serpent, and told to eat of the fruit of the tree of life by
the words of the devil himself. How can I be so sure that you are not decieving
me now in the way that the serpent decieved my mother."

Cain first let out a snort, followed by a chuckle, followed by a full on belly
laugh. "Oh, my sweet sweet Seth. I can garuntee you that I am not a serpent. Do
I slither on the ground like one? I am also not a beast. Do I stand on four
paws and roar?  I am not a bird. I am not a bug. I am not a devil. All of these
things I am not. I am merely a human. Look at me, and feel my flesh. Does it
not feel the same as your own flesh and blood? Listen to me, and hear my words.
Do my words not sound the same as the words of a man? Place your ear to my
heart. Does the heart of a devil beat in the same way as the heart of a human?
I think not. I am no devil. I am but a man, just as you."

Seth looked a little cautious. "How can I be certain that you aren't a devil?
Maybe you are a kind of devil that is able to trick humans into thinking they
are a man. You are the kind of devil that is able to show that it is entirely
like a human, but really, on the inside, it's a devil."

Cain looked visibly confused. He wasn't sure what Seth was saying. "Listen,
Seth. You seem to be convinced I am a devil. Of all the things you should be
worried about our meeting together here, there are way more important things to
talk about then whether or not I am a devil. If you want to believe that I am
somehow the devil, then fine, but please understand that I have done nothing to
indicate that I am the devil in any way, shape, or form, to you right now. Have
I done anything that has made you uncomfortable, or anything to make you think
I am a devil?"

Seth pondered this question. "Well, you did raise your sword at me outside."

Cain laughed, "Yes, and that made you very uncomfortable, didn't it?"

Seth chuckled a little bit. "Yeah, it did make me very uncomfortable. Like,
that's not cool man. I don't know what our parents tried to teach you when you
were growing up, but I know what my parents taught me growing up, and that is,
you don't just go pulling swords on people to make points. So I suppose that,
if you are my brother, you wouldn't go around just pointing swords at people.
That is something a devil would do. So I think I have argued myself into saying
that I do believe, in spite of everything t hat you say, that you are a devil."

Cain just laughed. "So be it then. I am a devil!" Cain was laughing rather
loudly now. "Oh, imagine that. I left my home, and when I return, I am a devil!
What a story that would be! Oh Seth, would you like to hear the story of how I
became the devil?"

Seth rolled his eyes. "Okay stop, I get it. You're not the devil."

"Oh, but I am!" Cain continued. "Let me tell you the story of how I became a
devil.

"So it started soon after I had to witness Abel's unfortunate death. I went in
to the woods after being banish by my parents, and I killed a deer. As I was
eating the deer, a hawk flew above me, and said, 'Caw CAW! Can I get a piece of
that? Caw CAW!' and so of course, I replied, 'Only after I'm done with it.' And
the hawk replied 'Caw, After your done, Caw, works for me, Caw'

"Of course I was rather startled that a hawk could talk. But I thought little
of it, and continued along my way.

"I left the deer in the forest, and I started walking. I don't know how long I
walked. I just walked. Such is my existance that a life of walking and hunting
more than suffices to satisfy my most primal urges. And the fact that my
hunting could play a role in civilazed life just seemed self-evident to me.

"What I began to learn was how dependent I was on the grain for consistent
meals. I could subsist off of only meat, but it wasn't ideal.

"So I started walking through the forset more, always eating but never full,
until eventually, the hawk from when I first went in to exile came back to me.
It landed right in front of me as I was sitting and resting on my knees, eating
a calf that I had slain just only an hour or so before, and the hawk said to
me.

"'Caw, How goes it with you? Caw.'

"I was understandably confused, so I said, 'I am doing just fine myself, how
about you?'

"And the hawk replied, 'Oh, I am doing just fine today, caw, I just wanted to
let you in on a little secret.'

"To this I was surprised, and I said, 'Oh, the talking hawk wants to lend me a
secret. Well tell me, talking hawk, what is your secret?'

"And the hawk replied, 'Caw, I am the devil, Caw'

"And I asked him, 'I'm sorry, the devil? Could you repeat that so that I know
my ears are not deceiving me?'

"And teh hawk replied, 'You heard me right the first time, caw, I am the
incarnation of the devil himself in this world. Caw CAW!'

"And with that, the hawk let out the most vile, shrill, ear piercing screech
you have ever heard. When he did, I lost my orientation, and I became somehow
transported to a nether world. It was hot, and burning, and fire, and in the
midle of the throne was a horned figure. He was holding a three pronged
pitchfork, and had two horns atop his head. His body was the shape of a pig,
and his head was the shape of a pig as well. This man raised his pitchfork, and
declared to me.

"'I am the devil! You will worship me, and pledge your alegiance to me!'

"Of course, I told him, 'Fuck off devil man! You can't hurt me.' At which point
the devil ran off. I captured him in my hand, and grabbed him, and I said, "You
are mine! I have caught you! The devil could not get away. I told him, 'A
coward, you are. Worthy of your position as devil, you are not.' So I killed
him, and took his place.

"Now, what you see before you is your brother re-incarnated as the actual devil
himself. That is my story."

Seth was listening intently to the story, and when Cain was done, he asked. 
"So does taht mean you are the devil?"

Cain laughed. "Oh Seth. Let me tell you how much I wish my story were true."
Cain let out another big laugh. "Oh, if that story were true, then that would
mean that I conquered the devil! How amazing that would be. No, Abel, the only
devils I conquered were my inner devils. I didn't conquer any actual devils."

Seth gave out a chuckle. "You know, mom and dad are always talking about the
devil. I once asked them about "the inner devil," and the just told me that it
was a smaller version of the real devil. So here I am, a young six year old
boy, asking legitimate questions about the nature of the feeling of the devil
inside of me, and all I am told is that it is a projection of the bigger devil
being portrayed inside of me. What is a six year old supposed to do with that?"

Cain chuckled, "Hell if I know."

Seth continued, "You know, a lot of the stories about the devil seemed weird. A
lot like the story you just told. Is that a coincidence."

Cain chuclked again, "Well, if there is one thing we can be sure of, it's that
I got my devil story telling abilities from mom and dad." Cain let out a smile.

Seth chuckled. "So you can tell a story that's complete bullshit, and you know
it's bullshit, and it can have the same narrative power as the story that my
parents tell me about their story."

Cain replied, "Oh, but of course. Just because a story is compelling doesn't
mean that it's in any way true. In fact, some of the most compelling stories
are those that are the most untrue."

Seth pondered this for a moment. "So the story about the apple. Is that one
true?"

"Apple!" Cain laughed. "No, there was no apple."

Seth replied, "But what about the snake and the apple story? Is that one just
totally false as well?"

Cain clarified himself. "You see, Seth, our parents did not eat an apple to
gain the knowledge of good and evil, they ate mushrooms. The fact that they
tell you it's an apple probably means that you have no idea what I'm talking
about. Do you?"

Seth shook his head. Cain sighed.

"I thought that was the case, " Cain continued. "You see, there was another
thing about your brother Abel that your parents don't want you to know. And
something about yourself as well."

Seth was waiting in anticipation. "Are you suggesting that my parents are
hiding something from me?"

Cain replied, "Well of course they are. They hid the fact that you had two
older brothers from you for twelve years, of course they have more that they
are hiding from you."

Seth wanted to believe that it wasn't so, but he knew his parents, and he knew
that it was possible that they could be hiding something from him. "What is
it?" he asked.

Cain replied, "The story that mom tells about the tree of life. She told that
story to me a little differently. You see, here's how she told it to me.

"So mom and dad contend that they are the first two human beings to be alive,
ever, correct?"

Seth nodded in agreement.

"And," Cain continued, "The contend that there was, I suppose in your version
of the story, a snake that told mom that she should eat the forbidden apple,
and give it to her husband to eat as well. And then she did."

"Yeah, more or less like that." Seth agreed

"Well, here is the version she gave me.

"When our mom was pillaging through the bushes, gathering berries for her
husband, our dad, she saw a snake go by. She followed the snake, because she
was curious where it was going. When she followed it, she was encountered by
this one tree with mushrooms growing all over it. It was just this one
particular tree, that this one particular snake was slithering to, that also
just happened to be the only tree in the forest to have mushroom covered all
over it.

"Curious about the mushrooms, she took a bite. At first, she didn't feel
anything, so she at some more.

"From there, the way she tells it, she heard the voice of God. In her mind,
this has nothing to do with her voice, it's just, 'The voice of God', as she
puts it. The voice of God tells her to gather these mushrooms, and take them to
her husband Adam.

"Adam, our dad, who had been hunting the whole day, comes back to the hut, and
finds Eve having eaten the mushrooms. She says that Adam should eat one,
because when he does, he will hear the voice of God.

"So Adam eats of the mushrooms as well, and he also hears the voice of God.

"From there, they each exited out of the forest, and they agreed to keep the
mushrooms safe and locked in a closet.

"So now, both of our parents live their lives thinking that they were the first
humans alive, and that had an actual encounter with the creator of the
universe. In fact, they even go so far to believe that our universe was created
the day before they were born.

"So that's what they call the "forbidden fruit." It's some mushrooms that they
found in the forest."

Seth pondered this for a bit. "Have you tried them?" he asked.

"Tried them? But of course I tried them. I tried them at the urging of our
parents. From my earliest memories, I can remember eating those mushrooms, and
seeing the world unfold before my very eyes. I can't imagine a world without
mushrooms.

"That was the world my brother Abel grew up in. By the time Abel was born, I
just assumed that he would eat the mushrooms as I did, but my parents were
against the idea. They said that they wanted to try having a baby that hasn't
partaken of the "forbidden fruit" as they called it.

"So they raised Abel to me the farmer that he was, and then, when he and I got
into a disagreement, and he died in the encounter, I got put with all the
blame, and told that I was exiled from their living place.

"I have told you about that. I have taken notice, and I have seen that they
have not removed the mushrooms from the locked safe where they keep them. So I
take it that you know nothing of the safe, or the mushrooms?"

"No," Seth replied, "Not at all."

"Right, so now you have a better idea what 'God' means to them now, as well.
You see, 'God' is just what they feel when they eat these mushrooms."

Seth was getting visibly upset at that statement. "No, that can't be true. They
told me that it was their life!"

"Again," Cain replied, "Our parents are not too keen about telling you
everything they know. We know this. It shouldn't surprise you that there is
more to the story than you were originally told."

Seth started to get riled up.

"In fact," Cain continued, "It would be good for you if you ate some mushrooms
with me. I can find some in the forest, and I can bring them back, and you can
see what they are like."

"Absolutely not!" Seth objected. "I will not eat the mushrooms. Mind you, I'm
still not so convinced that you aren't some sort of devil trying to tempt me to
something! I'm warry of your words."

Cain laughed again. "I am not the devil, young Seth. We have already
established this. I can see what I am saying is not making sense to you. That's
okay. It doesn't have to make sense. All I'm saying is that the fruit of the
tree of Knowledge is a difficult thing to grapple with, so our parents are most
likely acting under the assumption that if you didn't know about it at all,
then perhaps you can remain pure."

At this, Seth could only cry. He cried a little, and then he cried a lot. "I
don't understand." Seth said through tears. "I don't know who to trust now. Are
you telling me the truth, or are our parents? How will I ever know? How should
I know who to trust?"

Cain placed his hand on Seth's shoulder, and said, "Listen Seth, when you
discover the truth, it won't be from Mom and Dad, and it won't be from me. When
you discover the truth, it will be from within yourself. You won't have to
trust anyone, you will simply know what the truth is from your soul. Trust
nobody except yourself."

Seth asked again, "Why should I trust you then? Why should I listen to you at
all."

And cain replied, "You can listen to me, but you don't have to trust me. I
don't require your trust, I just require your ear, and your mind. I am telling
you things as best I can describe them. This is what I have discovered from my
life here on this world. This is what I know. I have told it to you. You don't
have to believe me. In fact, you probably shouldn't believe me. You might be
better off if you never knew about the mushrooms. But I already commited that
crime, in spite of our parents best efforts, and so I see I have sparked your
curiosity.  But when you come to it, you will know, and you will be able to act
on your own to satisfy your curiosity and understanding of the world, and when
you do, you will see what God is, and you will see what the Devil is. And
perhaps you will see even more. We can't say. So don't trust me. I am merely
attempting to tell you the truth as best I am able, to save you the headache of
having to discover everything I did on your own. It's up to you to decide if
whether or not what I say resonates with you on a deeper level, but even if it
doesn't, you will have stronger convictions of yourself either way."

Seth was visibly upset. Still, he asked, "Will I ever see you again?"

Cain replied, "I can't say. I would think no, and certainly not if you still
live with Mom and Dad, but if you want to seek me out again, you are welcome to
do so. But if that ever happens, it will mean that you have eaten of the
mushrooms of the tree of life, and instead of seeking me, you will go on your
own path. So either way, probably not."

Cain let that hang there for a moment before he continued. "But hey, it's not
all bad. After all, all I can do is hunt. When the game runs out, my family, my
empire, will die. But you have a sustainable way to maintain your family. You
can grow crops for them, and feed them, and even protect them. You are a great
man, Seth, and I can see that you will do great things. My fate is to die. I
can see that."

Seth processed the words for a moment. "How do you know your fate?" Seth asked,
although the he thought he might know the answer.

Cain replied, "I don't. I just see where my life is taking me. I am saying, if
the way I see the flow of time work out, I'm going to kill all of the game,
until there is no more game to kill, and my sons will kill game, and their sons
will kill game, and all of them will kill game, and they will eat the game.
Eventually, my sons will have no more game to kill, and they will die off. But
you, you will never run out of seasons to farm. THe farm provides to you, so
you're kind will live long."

Seth was crying. "Maybe, maybe you can stay with us, you could become a farmer,
I could teach you. You can help me in the fields, and you can help me with the
animals. The plows, the feeders, all of it, you can help me with the equipment.
I could use another set of hands. Come back to us, brother, and be a part of
the family."

Cain chuckled again, as he does. "Seth, I can't do that. Mom and Dad have
banished me. I killed their son. They don't want me around any more. I was
their failed experiment. They gave me some of the mushrooms, and then I killed
their son. They see me as a demented outcast, impure in teh ways that they
think are important. They attach so much significance to their action of eating
the fruit of the tree of knowledge, that they can't see past their own lives.
They can't glimpse into the lives of others. Or they can, but they don't know
how, so they don't. They can't glance in to my life, they only presume that the
mushrooms made me murderous and hot tempered. They see me as a warped and
twisted puppet of the devil, no longer even human. They talk to me as if I am
some sort of monster, or beast of the wild. And maybe I am. I feel more at
peace in the wild then I do at home. That's why I can't join you. It's not
because our parents have forbidden it, it's because I have exiled myself from
their way of life. It's my choice to seperate myself from the farm. It's better
for everyone that way. Mom and dad are afraid I might kill them one day if I
join you in the dinner table. And the cold truth is, I just might. So it's
better for everyone if I stay out of your life."

"Would you really kill mom and dad?" Seth asked.

"Eh..." Cain let it trail off. "It's hard to say. The only way to know would be
for me to live with them again, but it seems that satisfying that curiosity has
no bearing on our lives from here on, and there is nothing to gain from that.
So I suppose the answer is no, because I would banish myself again before I
killed them. But if banishment weren't an option, I just might. Which is why
they don't ever want to see me, because I tell them I might kill them, and they
know that it's true what I say."

Seth replied, "But they just don't understand. We can resolve our differences.
What happened with Abel was a fluke, you said it yourself. It was a
misunderstanding, something of an accident. You shouldn't have to live in the
shadow of what you did for the rest of your life." Seth felt strange defending
Cain to his face like this. He wasn't sure what point he was arguing anyway.

Cain grinned, and looked out the window. "Seth, Abel had a life, and because of
his encounter with me, he no longer lives. I can justify it by saying that any
encounter with the wild would have met Abel with the same fate, but in some
sense, his encounter with me was that encounter with the wild. I was the wild
that Abel encountered, and he did not survive it. Now, you would survive, I can
tell by the way you hold yourself, but that's not the point. The point is, our
parents see me as something completely foreign to them, and I see my parents as
being stubborn and unmoving. As long as they are that stubborn about me, I
would come to kill them if I were in a position to, and they will remain
stubborn about me for as long as I hold that view point. I am not changing my
views on them, so therefore, they will remain stubborn towards me. It won't
change, and it can't change. This is my fate now."

Seth replied, "Maybe our parents won't change their mind about you, but maybe
you could change your mind about them. They are not all bad, you know. I get
it, they can be bummers sometimes, but you should be able to come to accept
them."

Cain replied, "No, Seth, I can't. When I tell you about the truth, the truth
that I see is incongruent with the truth that they see. The mushrooms have
shown me the understanding of the voices inside myself, where as the mushrooms
only showed them their guilt, and that guilt has grown to be their god. Guilt
should not be your God, and as long as guilt is their God, then we can never
see eye to eye."

Seth replied, "It's not too late. You can come back. I can teach you, train
you. You can become a farmer yet. You don't even have to accept mom and dad,
you just have to promise not to kill them. Just please don't leave me, I need
you."

At this, Cain gave pause. "I'm sorry, Seth. I cannot be there for you. I know
the reason you say this is because what I am telling you makes sense to you,
but you know you will not be able to stand up to mom and dad. Well, as someone
who has been forced to stand up to mom and dad, let me tell you, it's not that
bad. Find your mind, and speak it. They will want to warp and twist your mind
into what they want it to be. And that may be healthy for you to some extent.
But when you find something, deep in your heart, that you know to be true, hold
on to that, and don't let go of it. That is the most important thing that you
can have. And that thing isn't God. Or at least, it's not God as you know it.
No, rather, God is that thing. Yes, that thing, whatever it is, in that truth
you will find your own power of God. And if you eat the mushrooms, you will see
it. But even if you don't I believe that you will come to understand it inside
your soul. That is the thing that you must cling to, Seth."

Cain paused. "But I must go," he continued. "My place is not here. Take my
strength, Seth, and use it when you need it most."

With that, Cain held Seth's head in his hands, and kissed him on the forehead.
After that, he stood him up, placed his hand under Seth's chin, and pointed his
eyes towards his own.

"I am a man, just like you. I am made out of the same flesh as your flesh, and
the same blood as your blood. Any thing that I can do, you can also do. See
yourself not as the subserviant of our parents, but instead as your own man,
flourishing into existance. Every birth is a tragedy. But it's the call of that
person being born to accept their own tragedy of existance, and intergrate it
into the world. Seth, take your tragedy, and go forth into the world with it."

Cain kissed Seth on the forehead, one last time, and opened up the door.
Outside of the door was bright, and glowing with the afternoon sun. Cain walked
out the door, gathered his belongings in his sack, and walked off. Seth watched
him all the way, as Cain walked between the hills, into the ravine, and
finally, off into the distance behind a bend. Cain never once looked back at
Seth.

Seth watched as Cain walked in the distance. After he walked off, he watched
the sun set in the direction Cain walked towards, and he stayed in the cabin,
in isolation for the rest of the night. He wept. Then, when he stopped weeping,
he wept some more.

This was the first, and last, time that Cain and Seth ever met. The fates of
both individuals after this meeting each could be it's own story on it's own,
but suffice it to say, both individuals were deeply impacted by their encounter
with the other.

Here ends the dialogue of Seth and Cain.


