Hi! I like to talk about anything that makes me think a little bit more. As far
as the 3Universe in general goes, I like interesting theories about how it
works. Anything from Mythologies, Religions, more "New Age" ideals. My personal
belief mostly centers around everything being energy, and how that can be tied
into most belief systems.Speculation is fun, and What Ifs make me happy. Things
like how the future of humanity will play out also interest me, I like fantasy
and sci-fi, so those are always good topics when talking about what may or may
not be relevant or feasible.

In the last year or so I've also taken a strong interest in Personal
Development and Growth. I have just started a stream of consciousness journal
this year! I think it's been helpful, but i haven't actually read my old
entries which i need to do. I've started reading a lot of books about habits,
mindfulness, personalities, and decision making. I've read several books from
Osho and I think he does a good job of explaining things in a way that fits my
views. I started moving towards a more minimalist and self-sufficient lifestyle
this past year as well. Anything to do with helping people will usually light a
fire under me. Whether it's helping the future, the public, myself,
relationships. I think most of my time should be spent just trying to help the
universe become the best it's ever been!

I don't really get offended too easily so don't worry about that. I like
challenging viewpoints, and I am the type of person that really likes well
structured arguments. I have no problem changing my thoughts if somebody does a
good job expressing something. 

Currently, I just quit my second job yesterday. I plan on spending a lot of
time making music and practicing my Flow Arts which are both huge hobbies of
mine. IF you are intersted in music, flow arts, or anything of the like thats a
sure way to get me to ramble. 

That seems like a good start eh? My response is a little later than it would
normally be, but I was  \surprisingly busy this morning at work. Thanks for
messaging back! i look forward to more to come i hope.

--

Hey Vince,

Good to hear back from you!

I'm really curious what you mean by saying that everything in the universe is
centered around "being energy." I guess, I have a lot of different ways that my
mind will think when someone makes a statement like that, and I think it's just
because it's so unrefined a statement that I don't know where to begin. On the
one hand, I could think that everything is energy in a sort of hippy sense,
where more spiritual types would say that there is some sort of meta-physical
energy in all of us that guides us and lights our way and so on, something like
a soul.  THen on the other hand, I would think more of an Einstienian (if
that's not a word I'm making it one) viewpoint where, in the view of relativity
it turns out that there is a relation between mass and energy, similar to how
there is a relation between space and time, or electicity and magnetism, and
because of that, all of the concepts which we thought were each their own
sepreate thing are instead brought together into a single theory which says
that they are just different aspects of the same coin, to use the old agage.
The latter way of thinking I don't think would be the basis for a personal
belief, though, so I'm curious how you might expand on the statement that
"everything is energy"?

And don't worry about sounding too "out there" or anything like that. I would
say that, what I have come to accept is that the concept about "what is", and
"what isn't" is ultimately an unknowable concept. It's the nature of the human
condition that the only things we experience are just that, our experiences,
and it's not the case that we are ever able to examine "naked reality" without
the lens of our own perception. Because of that, all we can do is draw
conclusions that model the patterns of life that we experience, and the closer
those models match with the things we experience, the more we are apt to call
those models "reality". But really, reality is something that we never truly
know, and all we ever get to know as humans is our own experience. In some
sense, there is no, and will never be, a complete model of reality, because no
matter how sophisticated and refined our understanding of the world around us
gets, it will always be based upon our perceptions. Unless there is some crazy
way for us to, in the future, experience reality without the lens of our
perception, which is a pretty self-contradictory and incomprensible thing to
say, it will always be the case that the best we can do is create models of
reality which better and better apply to the things that happen in our lives.

It might also be the case that there could be different contexts in which one
"model" will be more fit than another model. For instance, you could argue that
the model of physics "supercedes" a model of biology, in that the laws of
physics can fully explain biological laws, but when a surgeon is performing
emergency bypass surgery, I would much rather him working with the laws of
biology rather than thinking about blood vessels in terms of quarks and gluons.
So in that way, just because the laws of physics explain the laws of biology,
at least in theory, it doesn't make it any more the "absolute" way of viewing
the world. All it means is that different models of reality have different
merit, both for their own sake, and also when compared against others. And so
the model of physics has great merit when it comes to talking about the
framework of reality, and the model of biology has great merit when a surgeon
is on the operating table.

When it comes to "far out" ideas, I like to think about the concept of "the
universal consciousness." Essentially, what this means to me is that what I
consider "me" and what you consider "you" are really just two different
manifestations of the same thing, and this "universal consciousness" is in some
way fundamental to everything of reality. I like this way of thinking, because
it really illuminates the need for empathy, since every person in this view is
just another version of "me" in some sense, and it also makes sense of the idea
of "original sin" as it's put forth in Christianity, since the doings of
everyone was really the doings of "me" but in a different manifestation of the
same consciousness.

The thing about it is, we have to be careful when saying these sorts of things.
It's easy to get swept up in these really poetic ways of viewing the world, and
then justifying it by saying "well, no theory of reality will ever be complete,
so there is no reason this theory shouldn't have at least some merit." Well,
the merit of the "universal consciousness" theory is that it's poetic, and it
helps me when I start to feel resentment to the world (which I often times do)
but when it comes to actually explaning how the world works, there's not a lot
evidence that can be placed on this theory. For instance, if it were in some
way "true," we should be able to run experiments where perhaps sometimes I
literally feel what you're feeling, or I could think what you're thinking, but
we're not able to produce something like that in a lab, and I have yet to have
such an experience that couldn't be explained by normal psychological empathy.
The place for this theory, at this point then, is as a fun thought experiment,
and barring some breakthrough in neuroscience, not much more. Still, there is
so little that we know about consciousness that there's no reason why such a
theory would be neccesarily false, and there is a small part of me that really
wants it to be true, but at the same time, it's important to understand that
such a theory is mostly just for idle philosophical musing.

So yeah, I can get rambly at times, but hopefully that doesn't bore you too
much.

There was a time in my life when I was getting really interested in music, and
more notably, I was interested in the ways that the structure of music relates
to computer science, but it was something of a passing interest, and I never
broke through a point that actually allowed me to do anything useful with what
I was thinking about, and other life things got in the way. I learned piano as
a child, and occasionally I'll come back to it, but only as a passing hobby.

I'm curious what you mean by Flow Arts? A quick google search led me to see
what I would generally consider something like "rave dance" but that is only
because I don't have a strong understanding of what rave culture is like. What
sorts of props and things do you use? Do you do this with others or is it a
solo hobby? Go ahead and enlighten me on the "flow arts" scene.

Also, what are your days generally like? What do you do for work (you said you
quit your second job which I presume means you have a first job still)? Let me
know whatever else you want to get into. I don't generally get bored reading
something when the person is excited about it, so go ahead and tell me about
whatever you want with whatever detail you want.

Also, don't worry about the response time or anything like that. With something
like this I think it's cool to just reply whenever you have the time. We
shouldn't have to feel obligated to make timely replies or anything like that.
I just like hearing what people have to say, and if the other person is at all
interested in what I say, then all the better.

I look forward to hearing back from you again.

Peace,

-Brett

--


Hey Vince,

Good to hear back from you!

I'm really curious what you mean by saying that everything in the universe is centered around "being energy." I guess, I have a lot of different ways that my mind will think when someone makes a statement like that, and I think it's just because it's so unrefined a statement that I don't know where to begin. On the one hand, I could think that everything is energy in a sort of hippy sense, where more spiritual types would say that there is some sort of meta-physical energy in all of us that guides us and lights our way and so on, something like a soul.  THen on the other hand, I would think more of an Einstienian (if that's not a word I'm making it one) viewpoint where, in the view of relativity it turns out that there is a relation between mass and energy, similar to how there is a relation between space and time, or electicity and magnetism, and because of that, all of the concepts which we thought were each their own sepreate thing are instead brought together into a single theory which says that they are just different aspects of the same coin, to use the old agage.  The latter way of thinking I don't think would be the basis for a personal belief, though, so I'm curious how you might expand on the statement that "everything is energy"?

And don't worry about sounding too "out there" or anything like that. I would say that, what I have come to accept is that the concept about "what is", and "what isn't" is ultimately an unknowable concept. It's the nature of the human condition that the only things we experience are just that, our experiences, and it's not the case that we are ever able to examine "naked reality" without the lens of our own perception. Because of that, all we can do is draw conclusions that model the patterns of life that we experience, and the closer those models match with the things we experience, the more we are apt to call those models "reality". But really, reality is something that we never truly know, and all we ever get to know as humans is our own experience. In some sense, there is no, and will never be, a complete model of reality, because no matter how sophisticated and refined our understanding of the world around us gets, it will always be based upon our perceptions. Unless there is some crazy way for us to, in the future, experience reality without the lens of our perception, which is a pretty self-contradictory and incomprensible thing to say, it will always be the case that the best we can do is create models of reality which better and better apply to the things that happen in our lives.

It might also be the case that there could be different contexts in which one "model" will be more fit than another model. For instance, you could argue that the model of physics "supercedes" a model of biology, in that the laws of physics can fully explain biological laws, but when a surgeon is performing emergency bypass surgery, I would much rather him working with the laws of biology rather than thinking about blood vessels in terms of quarks and gluons.  So in that way, just because the laws of physics explain the laws of biology, at least in theory, it doesn't make it any more the "absolute" way of viewing the world. All it means is that different models of reality have different merit, both for their own sake, and also when compared against others. And so the model of physics has great merit when it comes to talking about the framework of reality, and the model of biology has great merit when a surgeon is on the operating table.

When it comes to "far out" ideas, I like to think about the concept of "the universal consciousness." Essentially, what this means to me is that what I consider "me" and what you consider "you" are really just two different manifestations of the same thing, and this "universal consciousness" is in some way fundamental to everything of reality. I like this way of thinking, because it really illuminates the need for empathy, since every person in this view is just another version of "me" in some sense, and it also makes sense of the idea of "original sin" as it's put forth in Christianity, since the doings of everyone was really the doings of "me" but in a different manifestation of the same consciousness.

The thing about it is, we have to be careful when saying these sorts of things.  It's easy to get swept up in these really poetic ways of viewing the world, and then justifying it by saying "well, no theory of reality will ever be complete, so there is no reason this theory shouldn't have at least some merit." Well, the merit of the "universal consciousness" theory is that it's poetic, and it helps me when I start to feel resentment to the world (which I often times do) but when it comes to actually explaning how the world works, there's not a lot evidence that can be placed on this theory. For instance, if it were in some way "true," we should be able to run experiments where perhaps sometimes I literally feel what you're feeling, or I could think what you're thinking, but we're not able to produce something like that in a lab, and I have yet to have such an experience that couldn't be explained by normal psychological empathy.  The place for this theory, at this point then, is as a fun thought experiment, and barring some breakthrough in neuroscience, not much more. Still, there is so little that we know about consciousness that there's no reason why such a theory would be neccesarily false, and there is a small part of me that really wants it to be true, but at the same time, it's important to understand that such a theory is mostly just for idle philosophical musing.

So yeah, I can get rambly at times, but hopefully that doesn't bore you too much.

There was a time in my life when I was getting really interested in music, and more notably, I was interested in the ways that the structure of music relates to computer science, but it was something of a passing interest, and I never broke through a point that actually allowed me to do anything useful with what I was thinking about, and other life things got in the way. I learned piano as a child, and occasionally I'll come back to it, but only as a passing hobby.

I'm curious what you mean by Flow Arts? A quick google search led me to see what I would generally consider something like "rave dance" but that is only because I don't have a strong understanding of what rave culture is like. What sorts of props and things do you use? Do you do this with others or is it a solo hobby? Go ahead and enlighten me on the "flow arts" scene.

Also, what are your days generally like? What do you do for work (you said you quit your second job which I presume means you have a first job still)? Let me know whatever else you want to get into. I don't generally get bored reading something when the person is excited about it, so go ahead and tell me about whatever you want with whatever detail you want.

Also, don't worry about the response time or anything like that. With something like this I think it's cool to just reply whenever you have the time. We shouldn't have to feel obligated to make timely replies or anything like that.  I just like hearing what people have to say, and if the other person is at all interested in what I say, then all the better.

I look forward to hearing back from you again.

Peace,

-Brett
