Alright, so i didn't mind your rambling at all I thought it was great actually.
I definitely lean towards a lot of hippie culture, so anytime you think it
sounds like im talking about hippie stuff, I probably am. That gives a small
lense to view my writing through. As far as energy goes you were actually
pretty close with BOTH of your thoughts. I'll start with the Einstienian one
because that's more the base of it.  " in the view of relativity it turns out
that there is a relation between mass and energy, similar to how there is a
relation between space and time, or electricity and magnetism, and because of
that, all of the concepts which we thought were each their own separate thing
are instead brought together into a single theory which says that they are just
different aspects of the same coin, to use the old adage. " So to build on that
a little, since einstein more and more discoveries have shown that everything
is just waves of energy. Electrons are just waves, we use the electron cloud
model now instead of the old solar system looking one, because the electron
could be anywhere in that space at any time. Protons, light, everything breaks
down to waves and pulsing at some point. In at least one study (I want to say
it was proved in another but I could be wrong) scientists proved quantum
entanglement, between two electrons. They made a change to one electron, and
observed an instant change in the "entangled" electron miles away, instantly.
So in my head this paints this picture that everything broken down eventually
just turns into waves and energy, and this energy is connected in a huge web.
How common quantum entanglement is, is unknown, but I woud doubt that
everything is connected to everything necessarily, but that there is definitely
a web that connects across so many points.

Leading that into a more spiritual sense, it's the core reason that i believe
that so many religions exist, and are so strongly defended by their followers.
I went to a Baptist Church as a teenager, and I remember so many times, and
situations where it was as if someone was literally listening as we prayed and
dropped what we needed right on us. I believe in coincidence, and i believe
when you are looking for something that that's what you see, but i still saw
things at that church that I couldn't describe as anything other than
incredible, prayers answered, and miracles. As I grew up, years after I had
stopped going to church, I realized that everyone gets their prayers answered,
or they think they do. They brag about it all the time, they probably wouldn't
even stay in their religion if they weren't. I didn't matter if they were a
Baptist, Methodist, Muslim, Catholic, Buddhist, or Hindu (even though they
don't really "pray" in the same exact sense i don't think) they all got answers
they were searching for.  My hippie friends and their "synchronicities" and
good vibes or my wiccan friends with their spells. Everybody believes they have
some answer and it's helping them through life. For me, the way I reconcile it
is that with this web of quantum entanglement, and this breakdown of all of us
into waves and energy systems  (even as you break down the body it just smaller
and smaller systems of energy being used to build more complex systems) shows
that your belief system isn't necessarily what matters. Just the energy you put
forth. If you get 10,000 Baptists fasting and praying fervently and pushing
their will on the universe, maybe that pastors tumor will shrink, or maybe the
missionary in Asia will get a large donation before their deadline. If that
group of people are Islamic, I still think they can accomplish the same things.
The tradition, and ritual of it all is just to put you into a different state
and energy level I think, I don't think incense or facing east, or the right
oil really matters in the universe. You also see this in plant studies, plants
that are screamed at, or placed in environments listening to loud angry music
do not grow as well as ones placed in a more positive music, and voice
environment. Things like the placebo effect factor into it. I feel like the
more we learn, the more we will see just how connected we are, and how much we
can effect the world around us with just intention. 

Sorry, I pressed send halfway through my message!

I think it also takes the idea of the universal consciousness and empathy and
pushes them to a forefront as well, I believe those are important. I've never
connected them with the "Original Sin" idea though, that's super interesting to
think about.  Don't you view models such as physics and biology as a web, or a
stack though? Similar to how i described the body as stacks of systems using
energy in different ways, physics and biology, chemisty, and even anthropology
and archaeology are just stacks of systems that explain how or were other
systems work.I agree 100% with your view of "truth" and "reality". Scientific
test rely on our perception of the instruments being accurate.  Things like
seeing in the full spectrum of light aren't even something we have really made
any ground in. Our eyes can only see what they can see. Everything else is
machines, which are viewed through our eyes, which we aren't even sure if the
eyes can be trusted or not. This definitely keeps everything as "up in the
air". I feel that way about my energy theory too. I don't necessarily believe
I'm the only right or correct. There's might be some studies out there that
would argue with points in my theory. None of it is really all that important
though because spiritual, universl theories are fundamentally not something
that we are going to prove.

The topic of Flow Arts might be my favorite thing ever. You are pretty accurate
calling it a "rave dance" (although many would take offense) that's how most of
us found "flowing" (I'll probably refer to it mostly as flowing, or spinning).
A quick breakdown of Flow Art in general: using a prop to create movement art.
Often done to music. The term "Flow Art" comes from the goal of getting into a
state of Flow. Getting to that point (which can happen in any hobby or passion)
where you are completely lost, and moving free of time, thought, distraction.
It's just you doing your thing. When we flow we combine hundreds  (thousands?)
of patterns, turns, twists, transistions instantly.  Obviously we spend
hundreds of hours practicing, learning tricks slowly, learning what matches and
what doesnt, but when it comes to just flowing there's no time. The music
doesn't stop for you, and your prop isn't going to stop either. You don't have
time to make the decision moment by moment of what you should do next, it
becomes second-nature and feel almost pulled along at times. A common joke we
have is to say "hey how'd you do that" when someone is really getting into it.
We know full well that they probably couldn't tell you what they just did, or
how it was done. Even if they did it again they probably wouldn't be sure if it
was the same thing or not. 

So, it's a dance focused on being in a different mental state. That's the big
picture. Little picture of course everybody is different. Many of us perform,
we dance on stage in front of people. Some of us use LED props, sometimes we
use props that we light on fire. There are many different Props that people
use. I use poi, which is actually based on a centuries old islander tradition
of spinning flaming balls on a rope (or vine? something like that). In each
hand i hold one string with a weight on the end. The end can either be a ball,
stick, it can be lights, or fire, tons of variations all depending on
preference. I make patterns n the air with the ends and the strings, do tosses
and rolls on my body things like that. I also use a contact staff, which is a
stick that has weights on the ends. This is very different as the goal is to
move it around, in as many ways as possible rolling it on your body. It's about
becoming a platform that the stick can continue to travel on. Some people use
hula hoops, some juggle balls, or pins. some people use 2 smaller sticks, 3 or
4 poi, 2 or 3 hoops, buugeng, the list really goes on and on. For most of us
it's a personal practice, almost a meditation. We spend most of our time
practicing alone or with one or 2 friends, and we feel tons of emotional and
physical benefits from it. Many of us don't perform,at all.  Some people
perform in large groups, with tons of choreography, some perform solo during
concerts at music fesivals. It's a really far reaching and diverse culture.  IT
takes up most of my time, and is really what sparked my interest in music. I
was always hunting for something that felt good to flow to, stuff that made me
"feel it" or want to move.

What kind of hobbies do you have? What type of job do you work?

My main job is to work IT at a plant, i take care of basic computer issues for
them, it's fairly easy, I was delivering pizzas as my second job at night, but
I've been doing it for a long time. 65 hour weeks was wearing on me and I
wasn't seeing eye-to-eye with the management anymore.  I work from 8-4 and then
go home. I can't really tell you what my days are like now, because i removed
so much work from them. That can be an update I give you in the future.

I'm always interested in learning about peoples careers and lives. I'm always
hoping something will spark my interest as a possible future path. I like for
things to change.

Thanks for the good conversation, looking forwad to your response. 

--

Hey, so it was nice hearing from you.

So to start I want to clarify something about what I said at the outset about
how I consider the nature of reality. In my last email, I said something to the
lines of "It's never the case that we get to experience naked reality" or
something like that, and I do want to clarify that the thing that you mentioned
about our eyes being imperfect machines is something that somewhat misses the
mark of the point I wanted to make. Yes, it is the case that our sense can
betray us, and it's possible that something that we think may have happened
could have just been some sort of hallucination or conjured vision, and it
could turn out that, for instance, if we were to look at security footage of
something, and compare it with what we saw or experienced, they might not match
up. But the concept of our senses not matching with what is actually there is a
different sort of problem than the fundamental problem of an unknowable
reality. I don't know how much you enjoy math, but I think an analogy to
numbers would be appropiate.

So when we first learn about numbers, in preschool or wherever, we learn about
the concept of having something in our hand. So we are show one apple, and the
teacher says one, then she shows us two apples, and she says two, and so on.
Eventually, we start to learn that if we have two apples in one hand, and two
apples in our other hand, we have four apples total, and so we learn about
addition. And so on for subtraction, multiplication, division, exponents, etc.
etc.

Then, when we get to calculus, we begin to want to learn about the concept of
limits, derivatives, integrals, and so on. The intutitive way of defining a
derivative is by using what are called infinitesmals, which we would say is
"the class of numbers that are in the smallest category but not zero." But it
turns out that this way of talking about infinitesmals isn't mathematically
rigourous. We're not sure how it fits into our existing framework of what we
understand to be numbers.

To resolve this, people started coming up with ways to rigourously define
numbers (not historically, but it fits the narrative of my story that I want to
tell). So we go back, and we ask ourselves, "what exactly is a number?" It is
strange to think about this, numbers seem like the building blocks of
everything we know about math, but we want to ask ourselves if there is
something else that we can build our math off of. We would like to have some
well defined entity, and we would like to build our number system out of this
well defined and well behaved entity, so we can make exact statements about
what something like a limit or a derivative is.

This is where set theory comes in. In axiomatic set theory, (I think it's
called ZFG set theory or something like that) sets are well defined. Based upon
a few axioms, we can prove properties about sets. We can create unions of sets,
and intersections, and so on, and we can prove properties of certain sets by
following them back to the axioms of set theory. Sets are more rigourous than
our intuitive definiton of numbers.

But this doesn't do us any good, or at least, it doesn't seem like it. Sets and
numbers are different things, so we can't prove facts about numbers using the
rules of sets. So it seems like we've hit a dead end here. But of course, it
turns out we can use sets to talk about numbers.

Usually, when we talk about sets, we talk about "Set A" and "Set B" and the
union of the two sets (think venn diagram), but it turns out that we can
actually name sets in a way to make them look like numbers. We can call the
null set (the set that has no elements, which is defined axiomatically) 0, and
then (again, from the axioms of set theory) we know that "the set containing
the null set" is another set. We'll call that set 1. And then, again,
constructing sets from the axioms of set theory, we construct the set
containing the set 0, and the set 1, we will call that set 2. And it turns out,
we can construct an arbitrary number of sets in this way (a countably infinite
number to be more precise). Or in other words, given a set, we define "the next
set in line" to be the set containing the union of all the elements of the
given set, unioned with the given set. So if we have a set, we can construct
"the next set" using this method, and so we have constructed an infinite number
of sets. We have to come up with a way to name them, though, so for
convienience, we decide to label the sets with the numbers that we know and
love. So when we say 3, we just mean "some abstract set that we have
constructed using the process we outlined above."

I could go on and construct the positive rational numbers, and then the real
numbers, and negative numbers, and so on (it turns out mathematicians are
really smart when it comes to constructing things like this), but thats not the
point. The point is, we have now created a bunch of sets, and these sets are
bounded by the well defined axioms that we layed out at the outset. Since these
sets that we have constructed sets can be labeled with numbers (and we can also
fortunately define things like what it means to add or subtract or multiply two
sets) and since the behavior of these sets is well formed, we now can make more
rigourous claims about what it means when we say that a function has a
derivative.

It also turns out, sets aren't the only way to more rigourously define numbers.
There is a branch in computer science called lambda calculus. Similar to set
theory, the lambda calculus is constructed using some base level axioms, and
the way that "lambda expressions" (as they are called) behave is well defined
in these axioms. It also turns out that there is a way of constructing lambda
expressions in such a way to create the number system. So not only can we
encode the number system in set theory, we can encode the number system inside
of the lambda calculus as well. (The lambda's that represent numbers are called
"Church Numerals" if you're interested in those).

So now, the whole point of why I was going off on this is because, we want to
now ask ourselves "Which way of representing numbers is right?"

When we ask something like that, it's easy to forget why it is that we were
even talking about numbers in the first place. What was happening was, we had
something happen to us in reality. We had two apples in one hand, and two
apples in our other hand, and we combined them together to get four. This was
confusing to us. Maybe, we're not sure if we will always have four when we add
two and two. Or maybe we dropped a ball, and mapped it's motion, and want want
to know if every ball of every weight will always move in a parabola when in
freefall. Or maybe we want to try and answer some other question about what we
experience. We want to know if there is some way of thinking about the apples,
or thinking about freefall, or thinking about whatever happens to us, that
allows us to help understand the things that happen to us.

The way that we understand the apples better is by thinking about them as
numbers. So really, all numbers are are a way of thinking about the things that
happen to us in reality. We had certain experiences (the experience of seeing
apples and feeling them in our hands) and we wanted to make sense of this
experience, so we came up with a system of numbers to help reason about and
talk about the things that happen to us in reality.

But when we do this, we have multiple equivelent ways of talking about reality.
We could say "they're just numbers bro," and understand apples in that way, or
we could try and find a more rigourous way of talking about them (sets or
church numerals) and think of numbers in this way. But all of these ways of
thinking about it are just that, they are ways of making sense of the things
that happen to us. One isn't more right than any other per se, but they all
have different applicability to the problems that we face as human beings.

What I am fundamentally trying to say is that all of our ways of talking about
reality are just us attempting to make sense out of the things that happen to
us. We will never experience the mechanism of how these things get transmitted
to our experiences. But what we can do is attempt to think in a way which
explains, with as much clarity as we are able, the patterns and ways of
thinking that occur out of it. Numbers are one such pattern, but also music
theory, biology, culinary arts, physics and even religion are all just ways of
attempting to reason about the things that happen to us. Whether or not these
things are "right" is only determined by how well they map on to our
experiences.

So yeah, that's the whole point of what I mean when I say that our reality is
unknowable. The concept of numbers is only something of an analogy, so it's
not perfect, and just because it's true that numbers aren't "real" in the way
that some people think that they are doesn't mean that there aren't other
things that are real, but it's the best way to illustrate what I mean.  I'm
sorry to go on about that, but it really bugs when people interpret this to
mean that "our eyes might deceive us." The statement about unknowableness is so
much stronger and more profound than that, and it's very easily misunderstood.

I tend to lean more on the side of the skeptic when it comes to the sorts of
religous experiences you talk about. I do think it is rather fascinating the
sorts of phenomenon that you talk about. The will and desire to do something is
really strong in humans, and can lead to things that can seem rather ethereal
if you are the sort that is inclined to those things. But I think it's much
more interesting (and much more beautiful) to assign some actual tangible
explanations for these things.

I really like it when you say, "your belief system isn't necessarily what
matters. Just the energy you put forth." I like that a lot actually, and I'm
certainly going to steal it for some conversation that is inevitably going to
happen in the future. I tend to be split in two when it comes to this sort of
"hippie" talk. On the one hand, I would like the way we talk and communicate
with eachother as humans being to be as precise and clear as possible, but at
the same time, the idea that we're all connected to a sort of "life energy"
that binds the universe together satisfies me on a super viceral level.

I do want to say though that I would be cautious about using findings in
quantum mechanics to justify the things you say. I know very little about
quantum mechanics, but I know enough to know that I'm most certainly not
qualified to talk about the results of quantum mechanics, much less their
philosophical implications, and because of the esoteric nature of QM, along
with the heavy amount of math involved, I feel it is the most tragically
misunderstood of all the branches of physics. Don't get me wrong, I'm a sucker
for making poetic statements about the ways that we are all connected to
everything in the universe, but it's super important to me that those sorts of
conversations stay in the hypothetical and psychodelic regions where they
belong. I think attempting to link quantum mechanics to any sort of spirtual
idea, while relatively inoccuous on the surface, can lead to some rather
strange prejuduces when it comes actually incorperating that idea into your
daily life. I'm not saying that it can't (or even shouldn't) be done, but just
that I think it's insulting to both spirituality and rationality to try and
join them in some isomorphic way. Spirituality requires a certain level of
subjective intuition, and rationality requires a high level of reasonable
doubt. Both conversations are interesting, and developing both I think is
crucial to living a fullfilled life, but they are different conversations with
different contexts.

Personally, I grew up in a Christian household, and most of my extended family
is Christian, and I always had questions about how it worked. I wanted to know
how people knew that God existed, and I continually asked questions about what
specific passages in scripture could possibly mean. It didn't make sense to me,
and all of my questions were generally met with the response that "it all comes
down to faith."

Well, I gave faith a shot, but I still never "broke through" to the point that
everyone was telling me about. At some point, after I started to drift from the
church and live on my own, I realized that I was always starting with
assumption that "God exists" and going from there, and that's where all of the
confusion was coming from. I realized that if I got rid of that assumption, it
leads to a much richer, much saner way of viewing the world. Still, it was a
very unsettling time for me, since I had grown up with the church and the
notion of God, and I was just beginning to try and unravel what the universe
might mean if something like God didn't exist. I didn't know what to make of it
at first, on top of the fact that pretty much my entire family is Christian so
there is nobody to talk to about it there, but it's something I think about all
the time, and it's where a lot of my current views come from.

I'm very curious about how you get into "flow arts." A few years ago, when I
was in school, I actually looked up poi and how to use them, and I got to the
point where I could do a 3 beat and a 5 beat wave, so I have some idea of how
to go about doing it. But the thing was, it wasn't somethnig I felt like I
could pursue for it's own right. I didn't know what the "endgame" of it was, so
to speak. I didn't (and don't) know where it is that people practice these
sorts of things, or perform together, or anything like that. Do you have
meetings? Do you have a group of friends that all do these things? I'm curious
about more the social aspect of it.

I'm a software developer by trade. I got my degree in computer science in 2013,
and I took some time off after that. I ended up taking more time off than I
would have liked, but that's a whole story in and of itself. Anyway, I got a
job developing code a couple of years ago, and it's been steady going since
then. I would say that I am not entirely satisfied with my work. I like my
boss, and the people I work with are generally pretty reasonable, but I don't
feel like I'm connected with the people there or with what I'm doing. We're a
small company that writes accounting software for our clients, so most of my
time is writing feature enhancments and fixing bugs. It's all right, and the
pay is nice, but it's not what I want to do long term. I liken it to home
building. Right now my role is more like a plumber or an electrician, fixing
pipes or rewiring lights, when really I see myself more as an architect. I
would much prefer to write and design how code should work, rather than work on
these little bug fixes and features, but it's a start. The thing is, I'm not
going to delude myself into thinking that I can just write code and have it be
useful. This job is something of a stepping stone to where I want to go.

In my free time, now, I spend most of my time training BJJ. I've been doing it
for two years now almost exactly, and I got by blue belt last year. If you
don't know, Jiu-Jitsu is a martial art that is focused on grappling and
controlling the opponent. It's all about getting the fight to the ground, and
then submitting your opponent with a choke or a joint lock. I like it a lot.
For one thing, it's really cerebral, it uses the adage, techinique conquers
all, meaning that a much smaller weaker oppenent can still submit a much bigger
stronger person if his technique is good enough. Of course, being strong helps,
but the best technique will always beat the inexperienced strong man in the
extreme cases. I also like it because, in BJJ, you can spar at 100% intensity
without much worry of getting hurt. In striking, it's always possible that a
stray punch will accidentally knock someone out, but you can't accidentally put
someone in a triangle choke. I generally try and train five times a week, but
this week I am taking it light because I think I tweaked something in my neck
and I don't want to make it worse. Ciao Terra, who is the head of the group of
gyms that our gym is a part of, is actually coming down to our place this
weekend and is giving a seminar on saturday, so I'm looking forward to that.

So yeah, that's my hobbies in a nutshell. I'm not sure what to ask to keep the
conversation going, but just let me know your thoughts, or whatever you want to
talk about. I look forward to hearing from you again.

Peace,

-Brett

--

Hey, so it was nice hearing from you.

So to start I want to clarify something about what I said at the outset about how I consider the nature of reality. In my last email, I said something to the lines of "It's never the case that we get to experience naked reality" or something like that, and I do want to clarify that the thing that you mentioned about our eyes being imperfect machines is something that somewhat misses the mark of the point I wanted to make. Yes, it is the case that our sense can betray us, and it's possible that something that we think may have happened could have just been some sort of hallucination or conjured vision, and it could turn out that, for instance, if we were to look at security footage of something, and compare it with what we saw or experienced, they might not match up. But the concept of our senses not matching with what is actually there is a different sort of problem than the fundamental problem of an unknowable reality. I don't know how much you enjoy math, but I think an analogy to numbers would be appropiate.

So when we first learn about numbers, in preschool or wherever, we learn about the concept of having something in our hand. So we are show one apple, and the teacher says one, then she shows us two apples, and she says two, and so on.  Eventually, we start to learn that if we have two apples in one hand, and two apples in our other hand, we have four apples total, and so we learn about addition. And so on for subtraction, multiplication, division, exponents, etc.  etc.

Then, when we get to calculus, we begin to want to learn about the concept of limits, derivatives, integrals, and so on. The intutitive way of defining a derivative is by using what are called infinitesmals, which we would say is "the class of numbers that are in the smallest category but not zero." But it turns out that this way of talking about infinitesmals isn't mathematically rigourous. We're not sure how it fits into our existing framework of what we understand to be numbers.

To resolve this, people started coming up with ways to rigourously define numbers (not historically, but it fits the narrative of my story that I want to tell). So we go back, and we ask ourselves, "what exactly is a number?" It is strange to think about this, numbers seem like the building blocks of everything we know about math, but we want to ask ourselves if there is something else that we can build our math off of. We would like to have some well defined entity, and we would like to build our number system out of this well defined and well behaved entity, so we can make exact statements about what something like a limit or a derivative is.

This is where set theory comes in. In axiomatic set theory, (I think it's called ZFG set theory or something like that) sets are well defined. Based upon a few axioms, we can prove properties about sets. We can create unions of sets, and intersections, and so on, and we can prove properties of certain sets by following them back to the axioms of set theory. Sets are more rigourous than our intuitive definiton of numbers.

But this doesn't do us any good, or at least, it doesn't seem like it. Sets and numbers are different things, so we can't prove facts about numbers using the rules of sets. So it seems like we've hit a dead end here. But of course, it turns out we can use sets to talk about numbers.

Usually, when we talk about sets, we talk about "Set A" and "Set B" and the union of the two sets (think venn diagram), but it turns out that we can actually name sets in a way to make them look like numbers. We can call the null set (the set that has no elements, which is defined axiomatically) 0, and then (again, from the axioms of set theory) we know that "the set containing the null set" is another set. We'll call that set 1. And then, again, constructing sets from the axioms of set theory, we construct the set containing the set 0, and the set 1, we will call that set 2. And it turns out, we can construct an arbitrary number of sets in this way (a countably infinite number to be more precise). Or in other words, given a set, we define "the next set in line" to be the set containing the union of all the elements of the given set, unioned with the given set. So if we have a set, we can construct "the next set" using this method, and so we have constructed an infinite number of sets. We have to come up with a way to name them, though, so for convienience, we decide to label the sets with the numbers that we know and love. So when we say 3, we just mean "some abstract set that we have constructed using the process we outlined above."

I could go on and construct the positive rational numbers, and then the real numbers, and negative numbers, and so on (it turns out mathematicians are really smart when it comes to constructing things like this), but thats not the point. The point is, we have now created a bunch of sets, and these sets are bounded by the well defined axioms that we layed out at the outset. Since these sets that we have constructed sets can be labeled with numbers (and we can also fortunately define things like what it means to add or subtract or multiply two sets) and since the behavior of these sets is well formed, we now can make more rigourous claims about what it means when we say that a function has a derivative.

It also turns out, sets aren't the only way to more rigourously define numbers.  There is a branch in computer science called lambda calculus. Similar to set theory, the lambda calculus is constructed using some base level axioms, and the way that "lambda expressions" (as they are called) behave is well defined in these axioms. It also turns out that there is a way of constructing lambda expressions in such a way to create the number system. So not only can we encode the number system in set theory, we can encode the number system inside of the lambda calculus as well. (The lambda's that represent numbers are called "Church Numerals" if you're interested in those).

So now, the whole point of why I was going off on this is because, we want to now ask ourselves "Which way of representing numbers is right?"

When we ask something like that, it's easy to forget why it is that we were even talking about numbers in the first place. What was happening was, we had something happen to us in reality. We had two apples in one hand, and two apples in our other hand, and we combined them together to get four. This was confusing to us. Maybe, we're not sure if we will always have four when we add two and two. Or maybe we dropped a ball, and mapped it's motion, and want want to know if every ball of every weight will always move in a parabola when in freefall. Or maybe we want to try and answer some other question about what we experience. We want to know if there is some way of thinking about the apples, or thinking about freefall, or thinking about whatever happens to us, that allows us to help understand the things that happen to us.

The way that we understand the apples better is by thinking about them as numbers. So really, all numbers are are a way of thinking about the things that happen to us in reality. We had certain experiences (the experience of seeing apples and feeling them in our hands) and we wanted to make sense of this experience, so we came up with a system of numbers to help reason about and talk about the things that happen to us in reality.

But when we do this, we have multiple equivelent ways of talking about reality.  We could say "they're just numbers bro," and understand apples in that way, or we could try and find a more rigourous way of talking about them (sets or church numerals) and think of numbers in this way. But all of these ways of thinking about it are just that, they are ways of making sense of the things that happen to us. One isn't more right than any other per se, but they all have different applicability to the problems that we face as human beings.

What I am fundamentally trying to say is that all of our ways of talking about reality are just us attempting to make sense out of the things that happen to us. We will never experience the mechanism of how these things get transmitted to our experiences. But what we can do is attempt to think in a way which explains, with as much clarity as we are able, the patterns and ways of thinking that occur out of it. Numbers are one such pattern, but also music theory, biology, culinary arts, physics and even religion are all just ways of attempting to reason about the things that happen to us. Whether or not these things are "right" is only determined by how well they map on to our experiences.

So yeah, that's the whole point of what I mean when I say that our reality is unknowable. The concept of numbers is only something of an analogy, so it's not perfect, and just because it's true that numbers aren't "real" in the way that some people think that they are doesn't mean that there aren't other things that are real, but it's the best way to illustrate what I mean.  I'm sorry to go on about that, but it really bugs when people interpret this to mean that "our eyes might deceive us." The statement about unknowableness is so much stronger and more profound than that, and it's very easily misunderstood.

I tend to lean more on the side of the skeptic when it comes to the sorts of religous experiences you talk about. I do think it is rather fascinating the sorts of phenomenon that you talk about. The will and desire to do something is really strong in humans, and can lead to things that can seem rather ethereal if you are the sort that is inclined to those things. But I think it's much more interesting (and much more beautiful) to assign some actual tangible explanations for these things.

I really like it when you say, "your belief system isn't necessarily what matters. Just the energy you put forth." I like that a lot actually, and I'm certainly going to steal it for some conversation that is inevitably going to happen in the future. I tend to be split in two when it comes to this sort of "hippie" talk. On the one hand, I would like the way we talk and communicate with eachother as humans being to be as precise and clear as possible, but at the same time, the idea that we're all connected to a sort of "life energy" that binds the universe together satisfies me on a super viceral level.

I do want to say though that I would be cautious about using findings in quantum mechanics to justify the things you say. I know very little about quantum mechanics, but I know enough to know that I'm most certainly not qualified to talk about the results of quantum mechanics, much less their philosophical implications, and because of the esoteric nature of QM, along with the heavy amount of math involved, I feel it is the most tragically misunderstood of all the branches of physics. Don't get me wrong, I'm a sucker for making poetic statements about the ways that we are all connected to everything in the universe, but it's super important to me that those sorts of conversations stay in the hypothetical and psychodelic regions where they belong. I think attempting to link quantum mechanics to any sort of spirtual idea, while relatively inoccuous on the surface, can lead to some rather strange prejuduces when it comes actually incorperating that idea into your daily life. I'm not saying that it can't (or even shouldn't) be done, but just that I think it's insulting to both spirituality and rationality to try and join them in some isomorphic way. Spirituality requires a certain level of subjective intuition, and rationality requires a high level of reasonable doubt. Both conversations are interesting, and developing both I think is crucial to living a fullfilled life, but they are different conversations with different contexts.

Personally, I grew up in a Christian household, and most of my extended family is Christian, and I always had questions about how it worked. I wanted to know how people knew that God existed, and I continually asked questions about what specific passages in scripture could possibly mean. It didn't make sense to me, and all of my questions were generally met with the response that "it all comes down to faith."

Well, I gave faith a shot, but I still never "broke through" to the point that everyone was telling me about. At some point, after I started to drift from the church and live on my own, I realized that I was always starting with assumption that "God exists" and going from there, and that's where all of the confusion was coming from. I realized that if I got rid of that assumption, it leads to a much richer, much saner way of viewing the world. Still, it was a very unsettling time for me, since I had grown up with the church and the notion of God, and I was just beginning to try and unravel what the universe might mean if something like God didn't exist. I didn't know what to make of it at first, on top of the fact that pretty much my entire family is Christian so there is nobody to talk to about it there, but it's something I think about all the time, and it's where a lot of my current views come from.

I'm very curious about how you get into "flow arts." A few years ago, when I was in school, I actually looked up poi and how to use them, and I got to the point where I could do a 3 beat and a 5 beat wave, so I have some idea of how to go about doing it. But the thing was, it wasn't somethnig I felt like I could pursue for it's own right. I didn't know what the "endgame" of it was, so to speak. I didn't (and don't) know where it is that people practice these sorts of things, or perform together, or anything like that. Do you have meetings? Do you have a group of friends that all do these things? I'm curious about more the social aspect of it.

I'm a software developer by trade. I got my degree in computer science in 2013, and I took some time off after that. I ended up taking more time off than I would have liked, but that's a whole story in and of itself. Anyway, I got a job developing code a couple of years ago, and it's been steady going since then. I would say that I am not entirely satisfied with my work. I like my boss, and the people I work with are generally pretty reasonable, but I don't feel like I'm connected with the people there or with what I'm doing. We're a small company that writes accounting software for our clients, so most of my time is writing feature enhancments and fixing bugs. It's all right, and the pay is nice, but it's not what I want to do long term. I liken it to home building. Right now my role is more like a plumber or an electrician, fixing pipes or rewiring lights, when really I see myself more as an architect. I would much prefer to write and design how code should work, rather than work on these little bug fixes and features, but it's a start. The thing is, I'm not going to delude myself into thinking that I can just write code and have it be useful. This job is something of a stepping stone to where I want to go.

In my free time, now, I spend most of my time training BJJ. I've been doing it for two years now almost exactly, and I got by blue belt last year. If you don't know, Jiu-Jitsu is a martial art that is focused on grappling and controlling the opponent. It's all about getting the fight to the ground, and then submitting your opponent with a choke or a joint lock. I like it a lot.  For one thing, it's really cerebral, it uses the adage, techinique conquers all, meaning that a much smaller weaker oppenent can still submit a much bigger stronger person if his technique is good enough. Of course, being strong helps, but the best technique will always beat the inexperienced strong man in the extreme cases. I also like it because, in BJJ, you can spar at 100% intensity without much worry of getting hurt. In striking, it's always possible that a stray punch will accidentally knock someone out, but you can't accidentally put someone in a triangle choke. I generally try and train five times a week, but this week I am taking it light because I think I tweaked something in my neck and I don't want to make it worse. Ciao Terra, who is the head of the group of gyms that our gym is a part of, is actually coming down to our place this weekend and is giving a seminar on saturday, so I'm looking forward to that.

So yeah, that's my hobbies in a nutshell. I'm not sure what to ask to keep the conversation going, but just let me know your thoughts, or whatever you want to talk about. I look forward to hearing from you again.

Peace,

-Brett

