# 20180727
So yesterday, I had a lot to say, clearly, and today I don't have as much to
say. I have decided that I will spend my "extra time" at work today working
more on a Russian story than anything else. More, I just want to put together
some Russian setences, so that I have at least some subject to talk about with
Liel tonight.

As I slept most of the night, I felt as though my brain kept waking me up with
the sort of vague notion that I was putting together russian phrases, and I
noticed this, and was sort of glad at it, and went back to sleep. Well, when I
woke up for real, in the morning, I woke up and thought to myself, "Well,
that's good, I don't have any dreams to talk about, so I can just go straight
to the Russian," but it turns out, that is not true, as I later rememebered a
dream when I walked into the gym this morning and saw the UFC poster on the
wall. This was the dream.

So the location was a sort of series of arenas. I looked, and there were I
think 4 different cages, there was the "main cage" which was hidden behind a
curtian, than, as you go around the way, there were cages all sort of in a row,
as you went around, and there was seating all the way around, sort of far back,
no cage side.

What I remember is, I was going there with my family, and we got in for free
some how. Not like, we snuck in, but we got in to watch the prelims, which were
free to watch, and we watched some of teh "non-pro" matches.

Anyway, I don't want to dwell on it too much. There was a match between two
adolecent girls (which I know that memory came from F2W, which had some
children matches to start) and then there was a womens match, where one of the
contenstent was Valerina Strenchenka, or something like that (I don't know
exactly her name, but I have watched one of her matches before on PPV) and she
made the comment that "I've been out with this knee thing since 2011" which I
thought was an odd comment, but it was the dream, so I let it go.

Basically, the dream was just my family there, watching the matches there, and
that was that. As we were leaving, we went by the "pro match" curtain, and as
we were leaving (and the scene was similar to my outside version of other
places I know I have had in dreams before, with really wide staircases, and
lots of buildings and crosswalks and pedestrian roads and things like that), I
asked my mom, "So how much do you think tickets are?" and she guessed first 300
dollars, and I said, "Nope" with my thumb up, and she said, "Hmm, how about
4500 dollars" and again I said nope, but then I said, "actually that's the
highest dollar ammount for a tickets, for the closest seating."

That is where the dream ended, and I woke up. Now, the only reason I mention me
questioning my mom about the amount of the tickets was, both of those numbers
represent the to ends of the spectrum. When I looked at tickets, I was
expecting them to be 300 minimum, but it turns out teh minimum is 700 dollars,
and then the 4500 is the highest dollar amount, for the "closest you can
possibly get," seats.

So that was that dream. I think, I will spend the better part of this morning
actually doing work, so I will get to that, and I will have to put together
ideas for Russian sentences, and questions I have for Liel, later in the day.
That seems like the appropiate way to scale my priorities, so that is what I
will do.
