# 20181009
So I had a few dreams last night, two that I remember, that are sort of
fragmented.

The first fragment was a JKRowling talking with the actor of Harry Potter
(which I watched the night before), and Harry had a marble, and that was his
wand, and Rowling said, "That's not correct, that they are using marbles for
the wands, it's wrong that they are using that in these most recent movies. And
she handed him a wand, and told him to throw away the marble.

In the dream, the marble was floating. Also, Harry Potter was really ugly, with
a distorted face, with warts and such.

The second dream, I was in my parents garage, and I was planning on mowing the
yard. Jason and Lacey were pulling up, and my dad was there. Lacey went inside,
and I remember getting all of the lawn things ready. I was naked, and I
remember trying to think, "this is okay, I can be naked," but Jason and Dad
both were being judgemental about it, and my dad was saying, "You're going to
mow the yard naked like that?" and I said "Well, I'll put some clothes on when
I go outside to start mowing in public" and then I thought I might as well put
the clothes on now, since I am going to have to put them on later.

Something also to note about last night. I went to sleep around 8, and I woke
up at around 2. When I woke up, I read a bit of Plato's republic, but only a
little bit, and I went back to sleep around 3:30. The Harry Potter dream
occured in this first sleeping period, and the second dream happened in this
second part. Then, when I woke up, I checked the clock, and it was 7:40
somehow, and I didn't actually get out of bed until 8:10. I feel good though.
