So a few nights ago I had a dream. I don't remember much about the dream, but I
would like to get what I do remember out because it was a pretty cool and
interesting dream.

So the dream started, and I was walking up to a Vissassina (sp) meditation
facility. It was designed, so that the driveway to the front, went to the left
side of the place, then around the back, and entered in the back. It actually
went under the building, and then from there were stairs that went up. These
stairs came up to the left side, and up to a patio area that was facing the
front. Then, when you went in to the door at the patio area, the front door of
the place, there was a large meditation area, with cubbies, and various areas
for meditation, and the whole room was open, like a sphere. That was to the
right, and it went down. Then, to the left, there were stairs that went down to
a more secluded area, that was similarly structured, but more cozy.

So I walked up the driveway area, to the stairs that led up to the patio. At
the top of the patio, I saw a woman who was cleaning the place, and then I saw
TJ Miller, dressed in some robes and stuff. I walked up, and I said hello. They
greeted me back. Then I said that I did a google search for meditation clinics,
and this one came up, and I wanted to come and visit before I committed to a
meditation class. I then remember looking at TJ Miller, and he said, do you
know who I am, and I said, yes, you are TJ Miller (Although I'm not convinced
that's the name I said ni the dream, but he looked like TJ Miller, so I don't
know). So he said, "Good, I'll give you a tour of our place." Then we went
inside.

So we went inside, and he showed be the building. He started taking me around,
showing me the inside of the place. We didn't step down to the right, but he
showed me the main meditation area, and then to the left, he showed me the more
secluded area, with cubbies and things to hold belongings and store meditation
materials. I then asked him some questions about the whole thing, and mostly
asked whether or not Marijuana was frowned upon by meditatiors. He said,
"Actually, we're not those people that say that marijuana is a bad thing, and
we actually thing it's an important part of the ritual. Anyone that tells you
otherwise is silly. But we do have some best practices around it."

He then told me about their practices. He says that towards the end of the day,
while they are meditating, they make a joint. It had the shape of a conal
pyramid. He showed it to me, then he said, We take some of the strongest hash
we have, and we fill it up. Then everyone is to take one hit from it, and
that's it."

At this point, I asked if anyone ever spills the hash, because the way the
joint was shaped, it didn't look very secure in there. He said that No, when
people get really high, they become so focused, that they take great care not
to spill the hash.

He then went on, and said that, after everyone has taken a hit out of the hash
joint, they have something else, that looked like aspargus, like five or so
stalks of asparagus, and he said that they then take a hit out of this, to
smooth the high."

That was the conclusion of his talk about the marijuana.

I then asked, at this point, if I could take a hit out of the joint. I told him
that, since this is a dream, it wouldn't be a problem, and I could get a hit
in, and it wouldn't show up in my urine. He said that it was against the code
to do that, and that the joint was for the meditators. I became upset at this
point, but not overtly so, just dissapointed more than anything.

I then went down to the cubbies, and talked with some of the people down there.
I asked them about their experience there, and they said it was a good time.

That was all of the dream I can remember. I remember vaguly that there was more
to the dream. I walked out, and I walked quite a distance to a parking garage
that was far off, and I went back to my car. I believe I talked with Kyle or
Michelle or someone else, about why I parked so far away, and they didn't
understand it, or something. There may have been more to the dream after I got
back to my car, but I don't remember.
