# 20180827
So last night I had a dream. This dream was somewhat strange. So I remember in
the dream, I was living in my parents place, in the schoolroom, and the desk
was arranged similar to like it was when I was a young child. It was a small
table, and the computer was on the desk, facing the window, so that my back was
at the door.

This is where I remember the dream starting. I know, in the dream, I was taking
classes, I was taking classes, and I was wholly overwhelmed by the work load, I
couldn't do it. I was stressing out, and I remember thinking, "Okay, I just
need to sit down, and get work done. Around this time, too, I remember my
parents informing me that they were going to go out, and that they would be
back in the evening. So I thought, "Good, that will give me uninteruppted time
to work on this assignment." So I do remember sitting down to work on it, and
as I did, I worked on it for some time, and it was something like 2:30 in the
afternoon. I then remember, I essentially closed my eyes and reopened them, and
the clock had changed to 6:45. And I cursed myself, and at around this time, my
parents came back, I could here them coming back in the den. At this point, I
thought, "Holy shit, I just closed my eyes, and suddenly it was four hours
later." And since this was a dream, that is legit what happened. I thought,
"That didn't feel like sleep, that literally felt like a few seconds went by
when really four hours went by, that's nuts."

So at this point, I went back outside and to the den. My dad was there, sitting
in the chair he always sits in, and we started talking. He may have asked about
what it was that I was doing, or if I was able to get anything done, and I told
him, "Well, I wanted to, but somehow, I managed to close my eyes and open them
four hours later, and I mean that in the most literal sense." And he just went
"hmm" and that was it.

He then went on to say, "You know, Chuck called you, he wanted to talk with
you." And I said, "Oh, is that so, I must have missed his call" and my dad
said, "No, you didn't miss his call, he called three weeks ago," and at this I
then wondered what he could have called about, and my dad said, "He wanted to
talk with you about God, I think he makes some good points, and you should call
him back," And at this, I entirely rolled my eyes, and got up and walked to the
kitchen.

It was around this point that I woke up.

So I'm not entirely inclined to try and unpack this dream. Most of the imagary
is rather straightforward, although there is certainly something to interpret.

I am very much in a strange mood right now. I am being very distractable, and
am constantly looking toward reddit, google, and other internet sites to
distranct myself from doing anything right now. It is very strange. I don't
want to do any work at all.

Today is the first day that I have to take a urinalisis, and I have run into an
issue where I don't know what my four digit pin is. I have emailed my probation
officer, but I haven't heard back yet, and it's more just annoying than
anything else. So fuck me there.

I don't know what this mood is. It is possibly a lack of sleep. I was not very
succussful in falling asleep last night. I attempted my best to go to sleep,
and I feel I did a pretty good job at reading things and trying to zone out,
but in general I just couldn't go to sleep. I would lay there for some time,
then I would remember something, like the first thing was getting out the
trash, so I got up and took out the trash, then I would attempt to go to sleep
again, and be unsuccessful. Then I would think about how "I wanted to patch up
some of the things with my lit analyzer" so I made some edits there, and then I
would attempt to go to sleep again, and be unsuccessful. Something I also
remember was I had some heartburn from that day. The day before, I had gone out
with Daniel and Jessi and we had gotten viatnamese food, and I got pho, and by
the time I got back to my apartment it was late, like midnight, and I slept for
a good ten hours that night. But as a result, I had not eaten enough food, so I
was quite hungry indeed so I ate a lot of peanut butter with milk throughout
the day, and I have noticed that if I do that a lot, I get heartburn. So I
think that this heartburn was the result of that.

Something also, something I have been playing with, is practicing some self
hypnosis before I go to bed. So far, I have only been able to achieve short
levels of hypnosis. This time, I remember seeing, an this was as I was only at
my toes and feet and relaxing them, that I remember seeing a rabbit, similar to
bugs bunny, but it was the kind of image of an evil rabbit that you would
imagine being a sadistic rabbit, and first I saw the image with the head the
correct way up, but then, I saw the image with the head upside down, and in
both cases the rabbits face was smiling and daunting to me. It was very demonic
looking, it reminds me of Jazz Jackrabbit from those DOS games I used to play
as a kid.

I just got the idea to go and check if Jazz Jackrabbit exists still as a game.
I am very distractable right now.

And that's what I was getting at, today I woke up, after my dream, and it was
6:40, after my alarm had gone off, and I don't remember at all hearing either
of the alarms go off.

I think, I want to go back to not having the alarm at all. I have become
reliant on that. I want to go back to having the watch. I don't think I want to
sleep with the watch on, but I certainly want to sleep in a way where I have
tho watch with me. So I think I will go back to that, and see how it goes.

Something I must say, I simply need to get through the 2:30 part of the day,
and if I can do that I have little doubt that I will be able to get to sleep
tonight in a good way.

So, for the sake of doing something productive, I want to write out, in more
novelistic and characteristic form, the experience of myself being taken to see
the man there.

In fact, I might want to go with writing out my retort to him. But I think it
is more appropiate to write it out in a characterized way.

Here it goes.

I must now describe an event that Brett was to remember regarding his father
that had a rather strong impact on both his notion of Christianity and the
notion of his father.

At the time of the event, Brett was rather quite lost. However, I must make it
clear, he was not lost in the sense that he had "strayed from Christ and needed
to be found" but rather lost in the sense that he had come to realize that
Christianity was not the light that he wanted to guide him, but he had yet to
replace that light with something else in his life. So he was lost, not in his
conviction and condemnation of the church and it's teaching, on that point he
was rather quite secure, but rather, he was lost in a much more meaningful and
different way.

However, his father, who himself had taken the star of Christanity and used it
as the beacon of how to live his life, and had also decided that it was his
responsibility as a father to guide his children towards this light by doing
everything in his power to steer them toward that direction, saw Brett at that
time and determined that he was lost. It while it was true, Brett at that time
certainly was lost, when his father saw that he was lost, he interepreted that
meaning of being lost with, "Brett has strayed from Christ and needs to be
found." In fact, there had even been times when he would say to Brett, "You are
lost, you believe in nothing, you have strayed from Christ, and without that
you are nothing." Of course, Brett had come to expect such things from his
parents, such a statement had no true effect on him as far as being convinced
in Christianity was concerned, but it still would characterize the relationship
between father and son at that time.

So it was in this state that Brett's father came to him one time, and said,
"There is a lecture, a lecture on the scientific significance of Christianty,
and I want you to attend it with me." Brett was of course oppossed to this, not
because he was afraid that such a thing would lead him to Christ, such a notion
was far from his mind, and he was rather secure, as I said, in his position
against Christianity. Rather, he was opposed to it because it was a waste of
time in his mind, and he had no reason to spend what would end up being a three
hour ordeal doing something that he knew was a fruitless exercise.

But at the same time, Brett knew it would appease his father, and he knew that
it would be wise to appease his father in whatever way, especially given the
living circumstances at the time, so Brett agreed to go.

There was not much to say about this lecture, except that it was the sort of
lecture that uninformed and simple minded individuals with no taste for nuance
would give to force the point of Christanity down the throat of anyone who
might not agree with every point that was being made. The strategy was to
create tautological arguments that would come to conclusions about Christainty,
and then create straw man arguments for other belief systems, be they
agnosticism or athiesm of Buddhism or any of the other popular systems of
belief, and then ridicule those arguments, and belittle them. Such was the
nature of the lecture.

Brett did his best to ignore it, but of course, passing the time in whatever
way possible was the goal, and listening to the arguments and scoffing at them
made the time go by more quickly than otherwise for Brett, so that is what he
did.

And when the time came to leave, and Brett and his father left, of course
Brett's father wanted to talk with Brett on the way home about what they had
just taken part in. And Brett wanted nothing to do with it. He would simply
dismiss the arguments. It was like I said, the Brett of today might have been
able to give some counterpoints, and use this moment to facilitate further
discussion, but the Brett of that day was lost, but only on the point that he
had not found his star. He was convicted in the dismissal of this star, but
that is all he had conviction of. And so he shrugged of and deflected any
discussion. For how is one meant to find your star if the star you know to be
false in constantly shoved into you?

When they got home, Brett went to his home, and the first thing he did was put
on a skit given by stand up comedian George Carlin titled "Religion is
Bullshit" and he watched it. And he laughed. He laughed because, well, Athieism
certainly wasn't the proper interpretation of the world, and it certainly
wasn't his star, but he just wanted to watch that particular skit.

"There must be balance."

And after watching the ten minute skit, there was balance in Brett's soul. The
two experiences, in one way the canceled out, and Brett was still left just as
lost as he was. But in another, from this balance, Brett knew that in some way
he was already found.

But it wouldn't be until much later that Brett knew of it.

I just wrote that and haven't read it back, but I'm not very happy with how it
came out. It's one of those things, it will come back better given some
context.

Now, I want to try my hand at recreating the question answer period of this
lecture. I'm not sure what this conversation will look like, but I suppose
thats the point of the exercise.

There was one argument in particular, which has been made many times for the
case for god, that Brett very much disagreed with. This argument was given as
such. "You must agree that there is an absolute sense of morality, because if
there is not, you have no basis to say that anything is wrong. If you say,
there is no such thing as right and wrong, then you say that nothing is wrong.
It's one thing to say such a thing, but as soon as you say something, you then
must agree that murder is not wrong. If there is no such thing as right and
wrong, you cannot say, murder is wrong, and if you cannot say that then murder
has to be okay. But we know this not to be true, we know that murder is wrong,
and if murder is wrong, then we know that we have an absolute sense of
morality. And if we have an absolute sense of morality, then there must be a
god. We are not going to come to the conclusion that this god is neccesarily
"The God" but we must at least say that there is a god."

This is the argument, in all of it's absurdity. Of course, Brett simply scoffed
at this argument, at the time, and expected to do nothing of it. But when the
end of the lecture came up, the lecturer opened up the room to questions. And
when the room was open to questions, Brett asked his question.

I am having a very difficult time coming up with this interaction. Part of it
is, well, the whole thing is rather absurd to me, and it's difficult for me to
understand the absurdity of the whole thing.

I have to go to the morning meeting in a few minutes, so I think I would rather
just do that.

I think the best thing I can do is just make commentary on the notion of
absolute truth.

These things, this commentary, to me, it seems to be something that is so
obvious, so innate, that it will be difficult to put into words the reasoning
for my viewpoint. But I will do my best to describe the viewpoint that I share,
so that others might read it and come to understand it.

So the first point I want to make is, I reject both sides of the superficial
argument. It is very easy to say, "There are the people that believe in an
absolute truth, and there are those that believe in a relative truth." So
the first thing to say is, I disagree with the statement "There is an absolute
truth," but I also disagree with the counterstatement, "There is no truth" or
"everything is true" which are much the same statement. To say, "Everything is
true" is very much the same as saying "There is no truth."

I give this preamble to ward the reader against trying to label my viewpoint
and place it into a box that they have created. I want to strive to create more
nuance than that. Nuance is means by which we make ourselves clear, and clarity
of nuance is quite possibly the highest art that a philosopher can hope to. I
do not consider myself a philosopher, but we are talking about the concepts
that are brought forth in philosophy, so I must take that role and become a
part of it if my viewpoints are to become known. So let us do that now, let us
become the role of the philosopher, and unpack the notions of absolute truth.

I also want to preamble and say, that the notion of absolute truth does not
have to be destructive, and that there are certainly merits to taking this
viewpoint. My goal, though, is to zoom out and say, "there are other ways of
viewing the world, and while it may be a correct thing to narrow yourself into
the view of absolute truth, it's important to always have a more zoomed out
view, where you can see where that paradigm fits into the greater paradigm of
our existance."

So let's start at the very core of it, and get into my viewpoint. In my views,
the only thing I ever take to be an absolute is the concept of "I think,
therefore, I am." I think it was Descartes who said that, and I believe it was
actually a preamble to the existance of god. Regardless of the origins of this
phrase, though, the statement taken on it's own can still stand as a statement
of existance. To me, this is the only thing that a philosopher can say is an
absolute truth.

But this viewpoint is much much weaker than it might seem at first. To say, "I
think therefore I am" only seeks to say that "There is something rather than
nothing." It says nothing about what that something is like, and it does not
attempt to. In fact, if it did attempt to say something about what the
something is like, then it wouldn't be the only absolute. I think therefore I
am, I might rephrase to say, "I think, therefore, I have experience".

There are many such thought experiments, most commonly the "Brain in a Vat"
experiment, and also Virtual Reality experiments which are explored in films
such as the matrix as well as other art, which go on to say that it could be
possible to construct a virutal world, a world that is exactly like the real
world, and create a simulation of it. Then, you could take someones brain, and
attach it to electrodes, and the input to the brain would be the results of the
simulated reality, and these inputs would be fed into the brain in the same
areas that our brains are fed visual, auditory, and other sensory information.
Then, when the brain reacts to these things and processes them, it will produce
output in the form of motor neuron stimulus. This output is then fed back into
the simulation, and using the results of that, the simulation will adjust
accordingly.

Now, the thought experiment for this brain in a vat experiment is this. If one
were to create a simulation adequetely, so realistic, that it was impossible
for the one experiencing the simulation to tell the difference between reality
and the simulation, and the person experiencing the simulation cannot
distinguish between the two in any experimental or observable way, then at that
point, what is the reality of that man? Or in other words, this mans reality
would then become the reality of the simulation.

You can then take this a step further, and you can say, "What if this alerady
happened? What if our entire existance is the result of a simulation, and there
is a "real world" and we are not in it, we are rather experinceing the stimulus
of a created simulation."

In such a view, you could say that reality is "fake" and that there is an
entirely different notion. We see the reality as vitural, but since we have
never experienced what is real, the only thing we know is that we see this
virtual reality and call it real.

The crux of this whole thought experiment is that, our experince is entirely
guided by our sensory input.

The whole reason I tell about this Brain in the Vat experiment is not because I
want to convince anyone that this is actually a virtual reality and that we are
living in the matirx. And to take it a step further, I do not care to use this
experiment to say something like, "There is no way we know that this isn't
true, so there is no such thing as truth." Such an argument would be rather
thin at best. Instead, I use this brain in a vat experiment to reveal the true
nature of the "I think therefore I am" statement. This statement does not claim
to say anything about the nature of what "I am" means. I am could mean that we
are brains in vats or it could mean something else. But whatever it means,
there is still an I am. It's the job of the philospher to then come up with
theories for what "I am" means, but it's not the job of the innate to reveal
that to us.

So let's then talk about another theory for what "I am" means. And this is the
theory of the absolute. This theory of the "I am" to me is the most obvious
interpretation of the world, and the one I imagine that most people would
accept as "the interpretation of the world." So the theory of the absolute
looks like this.

There is a universe. The universe exists, and it is impartial to experiences of
consciouness. It obeys certain laws of governance, and acts in a certain way,
and that certain way is something that is entirely independent of our
experience. "The universe doesn't care about us" is something someone with this
notion would say. The breaking up of things into the external, into the
objective, is the primary driving force of this viewpoint. Many would even go
so far as to say that the notion of "choice" or "free will" is foreign to this
viewpoint, and rather would say that the universe, and a result everything in
it, which include the bodies and brains of human beings, is governed by the
laws of the universe. Something also one would say is, given the initial state
of the universe, and the laws that government, one could deterministically come
up with state of the universe at any point in the past, present, or future.

So it is the existance of this universe that people accept. This is "the
absolute truth."

Now, at this point, the reader may object, and rightly so, to my initial claim
that I disagree with the notion of absolute truth. They might say, "You idiot,
of course there is something that exists, which is external from us. Our
experiences are experiences that are part of some greater world. We exist
inside of this universe, and to try and deny that is lunacy. It's pathological
and narcisstic think that there isn't an external world and rather that all
that exists is our own consciousness."

And to that I say, "Yes, I fully agree" because your objection is entirely
true.

So we approaching what it is that I am trying to get at. I am not denying the
claim of the absolute, I am not saying that the claim of "The absolute world"
is entirely invalid, and should be disregarded entirely as false. Far from it.
In fact, this notion of the absolute world has many advantages, not the least
of which is teh understanding that when you act in a certain way, the feedback
you receive will come to you entierly apart from yourself.

But my objection to the external world view point is this. If you take this to
be the absolute truth, if you say, "This is the world that is, this is the only
viewpoint, that much is obvious, so we can reject any other viewpoint and then
continue to discover things about the world by narrowing our scope to just this
single point of view," it is then that you run in to problems. You don't run in
to problems when it comes to day to day living. It is entirely possible to
drive to the grocery store, buy some food, eat the food, go to sleep, and wake
up the next day, all while taking this point of view. And the point of view is
entirely adequete to equip a person to do all of these things.

However, where you run into trouble is at this point. At the point where you
try and discover more about the world, about the nature of god, the nature of
the transcendent, about the nature of consciousness. When you start to explore
beyond that which we already understand in human knowledge, when you say to
yourself, "there are some things we understand very well about the world, but
some things that we do not, and I want to try and understand those things which
we do not understand," it is at that point that this narrowed viewpoint of the
absolute universe must end.

"But why must it end?" you may object? Why is it that I can not seek to
discover that which we don't understand within the context of the absolute?" To
that I say, you can. But I also say, why must you restrict yourself in this
way? If you really seek to venture into the realm of that which is beyond human
understanding, if you really want to talk about things like the soul, about the
spirit, about demons, and the divine, then why is it that you would constrain
yourself to one narrowed way of looking at the world?

Because you see, I believe that the only thing that is innate is the notion
that "I think therefore I am" and that it's up to us, up to the philosopher, to
try and discover all the ways that "I am" can be. So, not even neccesarily
philosophers, but the psychology of the masses, has given us this viewpoint of
the absolute which does a rather good job at explaining the doings of what is
relevent to us in our day to day lives. And it's a very strong viewpoint, and
certainly one that must be considered when one takes any new idea or theory and
puts it through the grinder, so to speak. But it does not, and I argue, cannot
explain certain questions. The question of "what is our consciousness." It is
perhaps the case that the absolute will some day be able explain, with better
clarity and meaning than we have now, what consciouness is, but as of now, the
absolute is wholly inadequete. And worse, many people, in their attempt to
explain consciousness in terms of what it is that they understand, they come up
with these quite impossible notions, things like "The spirit" or "The soul".
And from these notions then spawns the idea of God, of Christianity, of Heaven
and Hell. In an attempt to answer the question, "where does the absolute come
from" they are forced, in order to stay consistent with their viewpoint, to
cling on to something that they call belief. The way these people reason is
this. They say, "I cling on to the belief in the absolute, that is all I have,
and in order to explain it, I must have faith in something else." And that is
where Christianity comes in. Christanity, not as a movement, or a social
phenomenon, or a history, or anything else, but instead, the Christianity that
I child discovers when he is first discovering the world, is an answer to the
question of "from where does the absolute come." The child is told that six
thousand years ago, a being, all powerful and all knowing, created the
universe, and from heaven he created man, and that these are the absolute
things in the world. And the child accepts these things, because the child is
simply looking to accept that which is given to him.

But where have we strayed? In what way is this incorrect. You see, here is the
subtlty in the point I am trying to make. My point is not that Christianity is
only one theory of the origin of the absolute, and that there are many other
theories, and what we learned as a child might be wrong. My point is this.

Seeing the absolute of the world is only one way of looking at and describing
the nature of our existance. The origin of thought should come from "I think
therefore I am" rather than "The universe is external and absolute". It's a
very subtle distinction, but an important one.

And now that we have made the distinction, I am now burdened with the task of
explaining to you, "Why does it matter?" You might ask "Okay, so that's a very
minor point, and a minor distinction, and because it is such a minor point, I
see where you are getting at, and I would rather choose to continue on
believing that the world is absolute, and continue my thoughts from that
assumption, because that is familiar to me and I don't want to let go of that,
and if it is such a minor distinction, then why should I bother myself with all
this notion of "What is the nature of reality" when it seems self-evident to me
that the absolute is the nature of reality."

So my burden then, is to try and emphasize, then, that the absolute viewpoint
is absurd. Rather, it is absurd when you try and use the absolute viewpoint to
describe certain things. It leads to contradictions. For most things, it does
not lead to contradictions, but in other things it does, and of those things
that we as philosophers wish to discuss, an absolute viewpoint is as absurd as
the newtonian one.

Yes, let me flesh out that analogy. Newton discovered the equations for the
motions of balls and objects through space. Newton was the first to give us an
accurate, repeatable, and precise notion to describe the motion of balls
through space. His physics made great leaps for the furtherment of mankinds
understanding of the world. Before, we had some seperated notions that all
sought to explain the nature of reality in it's own seperate ways, but we had
to take them apart and analyze them each in their own, according to their own
theories. But Newton was the first to take all of them and place all of the
existing theories into one theory, "Newton's three laws of physics". And from
that, we were able to discover "something deeper about the nature of the
world."

So what happened, after Newton, then, is people started to say, "Well what
about the movements of celestial bodies? We used Kepler's laws before" and then
you say, "Well, we can derive Keplers laws from Newton's so Newton's laws are
consistent with our previous viewpoint." And then you say, "Well what about the
nature of falling objects," and you can describe that with Newton's laws, and
then you say, "What about the notions of torque" and you can say, "The laws of
torque can be derived from Newton's laws." And after many years of this, you
start to see that everything we used to think and we used to describe with all
sorts of different theries and equations, you start to say, "We can describe
that with Newton's laws." And the more you do this, the more you see that
Newton's laws describe a lot of things.

Now, at this point, to tie our analogy back to philosophy, you could say,
"Well, it seems as though Newton's laws describe all of things that we can
think of. We could say, that newton's laws are the Absolute laws, that all
other laws can be derived from these laws, and that the nature of the absolute
can be described with these laws." So we make the claim, "We have discovered
the absolute, all things must go back to this absolute" and so you continue
your discovery from there.

Now, I must pause here for a moment, because any reader who has any idea of
these things at all knows where he may think this is going. Of course, we later
discovered electricity, and the speed of light, and Einstien created the
special and general theory of relativity, and so we discovered that Newton's
laws were not an absolute truth, and that this is the analogy that I wish to
draw.

But this is not the point, this is not the point at all. I do not want to say,
"See, that which we thought was absolute was actually wrong" This is not my
point at all. More, what I am demonstrating is this. The idea that there
is an absolute will always lead to a contradiction.

That is a rather bold claim to make, and I do not have an argument for it as
yet. My youth as a philosopher and my inadequency as a human requires that I
come back to this point later with a strong argument for it. I know that this
is a rather important crux of the whole point that I am trying to make, and teh
fact that I do not have a convincing argument for it at this time I know is
disappointing. But it is the claim I want to make.

My whole point is this. That which is beyond that which we don't understand is
outside of the notion of the absolute.

Because, let me tell you, reader, to say that "Newton is wrong and Einstein
proved it" is a ridiculous claim to make.
