# 20180813
So it's monday. I want to start this article as I always do with my talk about
my dreams of last night.

So last night I did have some dreams, but they were very fleeting and a bit
random. Rather, disconnected would be the better way to put it. I will start
with the section of the dream that had the most profound impact on me, and is
the earliest point in the dream that I can remember. I remember, I was at the
top of a sort of spire, the spire being an image from Super Mario 74, a mod of
SM64, of the last level which was the only level in that game that I didn't get
all of the stars from. Regardless, it was in a spire that was like that one. It
was wide, but it also had dropoffs, but there was also walls about it. There
was also a bridge that came to it from another spire like it. However, the
exact nature of this spire was not particularly impactful to the dream. What I
remember, is that at the top of the spire was Justin Sullins. And it must be
his image I think because I associate a lot of the aspects of the depression I
see in myself in him. He is a very quiet fellow, but I know also very
emotional. At least, I remember, near the point when I first met him, he was
dating a girl in high school, and when they both went to college, they elected
to keep dating, but they went to different colleges. So naturally, as the story
goes, he wanted to keep the relationship working, and would drive four hours to
Oklahoma to see her, every weekend, and then four hours back, and he would
dedicate all of his time on the weekend to going up and spending time with her.
As someone with experience in such things will probably attest, this very much
turned her off, and "they decided to break up". At least, that was the way he
would put it, but it was very clear that it was not "they" who decided
anything, but rather she who decided that they would mutually stop seeing
eachother.

A little bit about Justin. At the time, I didn't know Justin very well. We had
just met, and I was newly captain of the team. What I heard most about this
story was "the word around the team" people would talk about this relationship,
and word spread pretty quickly that they weren't seeing eachother anymore. In
fact, I heard it from his roommate at the time, Chris Freedman, that they had
broken up, and knowing what I know now I can assure you that Chris was the one
primarily responsible for spreading the news about this breakup. In fact, I
remember a time, when Chris was talking about the situation, and he said, "I
just don't know what to do. He is utterly useless as a human being now. I keep
telling him he should get over her, but he won't do it. He's so hard to work
with. He just sits in his room, and looks at pictures of her on facebook, and
he looks at them and weeps. He cries and cries while looking at pictures of
her. How am I meant to work with that?" This was a conversation that Chris had
with a few of us there on the ultimate team. Gossip at it's finest.

Still, this notion has stuck with me. Justin represents to me the sort of
person I would be if I gave in to my depression. It's, how would you say,
something of an unconscious knowledge that he struggles with these things. I
remember another time (and this could be why he came up in the dream now, the
dream of which I promise I will get to) in the more recent past, after we were
done playing board games at Brian Elies old house, it was Me and Justin and
Peter, and we were talking about all sorts of things, and we went to
Whataburger, as one does when you high and drunk and wishing to remenisce on
old times. This was also the time when I choked out Ryan Kyle on the hardwood
floor. Regardless, when we went to whataburger, I remember Peter and Justin
discussing masterbation. At the time, I had played with the idea of no-fap, and
I was at the point where I wasn't giving it a shot anymore, but I was playing
with the notion of "maybe masterbation isn't something I should do as a habit."
I say that only to say my reaction to Peter and Justin talking about sex, and
masterbation. Peter and Justin were talking about sex drive, and Justin said
something like, "I do it a lot. Like, I did it before I came here." And that
was that. It was one of those statements that had much more of an impact on me
then it did to the conversation. It was said in the midst of conversation, and
we went on to talk about girls, tinder, open relationships, etc. etc. However,
this one comment by Justin made me think, "Hm, maybe he is the kind that is
addicted to masterbation for real. I'm not sure."

Justin is a very quiet individual and I think that is why I have this
conception of him in my head that he fits the profile for the subject of my
dream.

So back to the dream, Justin was standing on the spire, recalling the time that
"he ghosted" someone. Now, this term came up in the dream itself after he was
in the process of explaining what he was doing. And as he explained, I became a
part of his explanation, and in the dream, we began to relive that experince as
he told it. In the dream, we were on a golf course. Justin himself, which was
really me, since I am taking the role of Justin in the act of reincarnating
this dream experience of his, was holding a rifle, with a scope, and a laser.
It was a rather sophisticated rifle, and the sort of thing someone who has
never held nor handled a rifle would conceive as the way a sophisticated rifle
would work. So I held the rifle, and as I was holding it, I looked through the
scope. Through the scope was a man. Rather, it was something of a boy. A
fuckboi would be the best way to describe this man. He was frat, and not very
much the sort of person who you would look at and say, "He makes a meaningful
contribution to society". At least, not from his appearence would you say that.
I know nothing about this person, except that he probably has a mother and a
father, and that he has a good group of acquantainces. So as I looked through
the scope, I saw this man, wearing a polo shirt, with some slicked back hair,
and generally just standing there watching the golf game idly, and I saw from
the scope, first the laser of the rifle I was looking through pinned on him,
and then from about six different angle, there were lasers that I could see
that were pointing in his general direction. It was clear that the lasers were
meant to all intersect on one point, one point which would be placed inside of
this man's body, but that the job was not properly done. I recall, at this
point, Justin pulling me into the narration, and saying, "I lined them up so
poorly, that I knew they needed readjusting. In fact, it probably would have
been more appropriate to readjust them to myself, that's how poorly they were
adjusted."

At this point, I interjected, and the scene shifted very momentarily back to
the spire, and I asked, "What were you doing here? What is your purpose." And
Justin just said, "I wanted to ghost someone". He said it with a solemn, but
matter-of-fact attitude. At this point in the dream, I just knew what
"ghosting" meant, but instead of giving an explanation here for whoever might
be reading this, I think it would be more appropriate to continue to reveal how
the dream plays out, and let the reader take his best educated guess at what
ghosting is. In fact, this is how it played out in the dream, I sort of knew
what ghosting was, but then as the rest of the dream played out, it only
confirmed that I understood exactly what ghosting was.

So Justin begins explaining the situation again. "I had to reset the auxilarry
rifles, when you do something like this, you want to be sure that you get it
right. Nothing would be worse than ghosting someone and not doing it properly."
From here, I shifted back down to the scene. I was looking through the scope at
the person again. Justin continued to explain his experince to me. I saw, as he
explained about the auxillary rifles, that the lasers from them all came into
position. I remember having a moment of anxiety here, as if I was not sure what
was about to happen was really what I thought was going to happen, but then,
Justin squeezed the trigger. I squeezed the trigger.

I want to say that the rifle I was holding (Justin was holding) did not shoot.
Instead, the trigger acted as an electronic relay for all of the other triggers
which Justin had carefully, through the sophistication of his rifle, honed in
on this person. As soon as the trigger was pulled, I heard a pop, and the man
collapsed. My imagination is getting in the way here. I do not remember if he
simply fell to the floor, or if there was any blood and gore as he fell. I
think, as my memory comes back to me, that I remember that I did see the holes
penetrate him, but I don't remember there being any blood. Instead, something
like a half dozen holes from the different angles of the rifle penetrated the
body of this man, and he collapsed. There was a stir in the crowd, although
this man was standing alone, and was now lying, very definitely dead, on the
ground after this trigger was pulled.

I then remember, at this point, I came back to Justin, on the spire, and I
remember him talking about this event. "I wanted to ghost someone. It was..."
and here, he trailed off, and as he trailed off, I began to anticipate his
words, unsure if they were going to go in a positive direction or a negative
one. I remember thinking that they would go in a positive direction, but he
continued, "... the worst experience I have ever felt in my life. It was the
worst because, it accomplished nothing. I thought I would feel a release, like
I did something that I wasn't allowed to do, and I thought that I would feel
this release, but instead there was no release, and I was just left with..."
From there he just sort of trailed off.

The last thing I remember was the image, very fleeting, and very breif, of
Justin inside of a prison cell. It was as if a prison cell had formed itself on
the top of that spire there, as if Justin had willed it into being just to show
me the result of his actions in a fleeting poetic way. Something like that.

That is all I remember about that part of the dream.

There are two things I think I should make note of in regards to this dream.

The first is that, I have thought about this. In my darker times, I remember
feeling that I wanted to kill someone just because it was something I wanted to
try. Of course, similar to my fantasies of rape, this fantasy I knew, even as I
was having it, that it would remain a fantasy. I would fantasize about it,
about killing an innocent person just for the sake of doing it, but I knew that
I would never go through with it, and that it was unwise to do so. I knew, even
as I would indulge in these fantasies, that the indulgance was greater than the
imagined feeling from it. Things are always more dramatic and more impactful in
day dreams and wishes, and while they can make you want to seek out the thing
you day dream about, the feeling that you think it is going to feel like in the
day dream is always way stronger than the feeling actually is. The idea of a
release always sounds so much more gratifing in a dream than it ever actually
feels in reality.

The second thing is, I masterbated last night as well. I had a very difficult
time getting to sleep. After I practiced some Russian, I went into my living
room, sat on my chair, and began reading some book idly. I fell asleep on the
chair, and woke up two rem cycles later, at around seven oclock. From there, I
knew that staying awake would be of utmost importance, but also that once I did
stay awake, I would have a difficult time going to sleep. Well, at around nine,
I think it was, or maybe earlier, I'm not sure, I masterbated again. This was
before I ate though, so it was pretty soon after I woke up. So it was probably
around seven or so.

Then, as I was eating some steak, at around nine, I was watching something on
youtube, when suddenly it froze. The entire screen froze. I tried to ctrl alt
delete or alt f4 or anything, but I had seen this happen before, and the last
time it happened, it was because my graphics card was fried. Well, I shut off
the computer, and when I shut it off by holding the power button, it was
strange because my keyboard was still recieve power. It was lit up, and I could
hear the speakres as well. They were turned all teh way up, because the video
was a bit quiet. I then went to turn the power supply to my machine totally
off, and when I went to do that, I heard a pop in the speakers. I immediately
decided to unplug the speakers, and turn them down, because those sorts of
things were concerning me, and I thought that maybe there was something going
wrong there. But that was just wishful I think, because I knew in my gut that
this graphics card was fried as my last one was. I opened up the case, and I
got the distinct smell of electrical burning, similar to the smell I smelt when
my last card was fried, but to a much lesser degree. This electrical burning, I
knew was the graphics card. I was still wishing and hopeful that this wasn't
the case, but I knew how to diagnose it. I went, and I unseated the card from
the motherboard, and I went to turn on the computer again. This time, the
machine provided the beep codes like it should, and I plugged in the speakers
to hear windows loading up and the different noises that my machine makes when
it does so started firing off.

At this point, I was wholly dissaponited. I thought back, how long ago had I
bought this card? I remember that it was about two years ago, and I thought, I
surely don't have a proof of purchase, and I have no idea of it's under
warranty at all. I then remember my dad mentioning something about the other
card that fried, he had made an off hand comment after I had bought a new one,
something like, "You know we could have fixed your old one". Something like
that. Well, I thought back to this, and I pulled out my laptop, my work laptop
that is, and I started doing some research on how to fix a fried graphics card.
The first video I landed on was some funny guy talking about how he wanted to
fix his old card, and how it was some relic, and so on and so on, and then he
mentioned putting it in the oven. I watched this and thought, "Surely this is a
joke." I closed his video and went on to keep researching things. Well, more
people mentioned about this trick. Apparantly, putting the card in the oven
will expand all of the components, and when they get expanded, something that
might have disconnected or shorted might become reconnected, and in so doing,
will cause the card to work like new. After looking through all of these
things, I considered putting my old card in the oven just for giggles, but
decided against it, and began looking in to what it would take to get an
entirely new system. I was researching all of these things, and deeply
considering putting myself back twelve hundred or so on newegg, but eventually
decided against it.

Anyway, I have gotten wholly distracted looking at ram. Long story short, I
decided against putting my graphics card in the oven, and I plugged it back in
to the motherboard, unplugged both monitors from the card, and behold, the
computer booted. From there, I plugged in the hdmi monitor, and that was that.

I have a suspicions that my TV with the VGA to DVI conveter might be the
culprit. I'm and weary of this whole thing. Still, I am ready to upgrade my
ram. I think it might be a worthwhile investment to spend about 250 on 32 gigs
of ram. I am totally okay with everything else about my machine. I might want
to upgrade the powersupply at some point to. My power supply is good, but I
alse have a suspician that it might need replacing. I should take better care
of my machine.

Something also I have thought, is I want to get myself a better desk for my
computer. The card table is wholly tacky, and I want something better. I might
make my way to ikea, and just browse what's up. We'll see.


