# 20180717 Dream of Metamorpheses - Visit my father with Papa
So today I am writing particularly early, as I had a dream that has had a sort
of interesting effect on me. So in this dream, I was at my parents house, in
the study (and this was the version of my parents house that is very much like
my parents house IRL, in fact, uncannily so) and I was in the study with my
mom. She and I were in the study going through my fathers things. I'm not sure
what she was doing, but I remember I was looking for the bible that I know he
has. It is a large bible, I'm not sure where he got it from, I think he got it
from his dad, and it might be signed, or something of that sort. Regardless, I
was looking for it, and so I was browsing the bookshelves there, and my mom
told me that that wasn't where I was going to find it. I said, I know, but I
wanted to keep browsing the bookshelves anyway, and on one of the shelves that
was just right there in the back of the study in the dream, with very few
actual shelves on it (the entire shelf was sligthly wider than shoulder width,
and it came up to my chest, and the bottom part was not a shelf but a drawer,
and I never opened that drawer in the dream, but in it contains some random
odds and ends), on this shelf, there were multiple copies of "The
Metamorpheses". All of the copies were very large, the size that I imagine in
my head that his bible is, but they all had varying degrees of ornateness about
them. The one on the far left was leather bound, and had gold trim on the
pages, while other ones were hardcover, without the gold trim, and in all there
were probably four different copies (although that number four I don't think is
significant, I just came up with a number just now in my waking state). As soon
as I saw this, I saw the edge of the spine with the label "Metamorpheses" on
it, I proclaimed to my mom "Look! We do have it. My dad had copies of this
book, it must have been significant to him!" And I was wholly excited to
discover that my dad had some hallowed copies of the Metamorphes. Now, I
instantly felt as though these were things to treat with respect, so carefully
pulled out the leather bound one, and I opened up wherever the book might open
to, and to my surprise, inside was not words, but instead music, like a hymn
book might read, and I thought "Well that makes sense, that there should be
music associated with a work such as this." And I started to read the music.
All I remember about the music is this. It started with four notes, written in
the key of F major, and the notes were B natural, F, A, and then G, and then
after those four notes, the rest of the work went on, and I knew that those
harmonies of those four notes would be played throughout the piece, and the
thing was written in compound time. In fact, if I had to put a time signiture
to it, my gut tells me that the time signiture would be 12/16, but my brain
tells me the time signiture would be 12/12. So it would be written in compound
4/4 time. I think my brain is correct on this one, because while it might have
been 9/12 I don't think it was, and it certainly wasn't something like 6/8.
Regardless of all that, I remember thinking how profound this was, that there
was music that went along with the metamorpheses, and not only that, but that
I had only just now discovered it, and I somehow knew in my head this music was
somehow intircately interwoven with the work. What I find strange is, I know
that the Metamorpheses is a work of poetry, and so of course there will be a
musical aspect to the meter and verse of the original, but this was entirely
seperate from that, and instead this was simply music, and I became so excited
to discover it and play it for it's own sake. So after observing the music for
a bit, I carefully closed the book, after looking a bit further into it and
seeing the text of what was written there, and I placed it back in it's proper
place on the shelf. Then I pulled out a less hallowed copy of the book, and
opened up to see that it was the text of the metamorphses (all of these things
were translated into english, which makes sense, since I have never myself
beheld the original latin) and I think it was written in prose, very much like
the prose translation that I bought at the store a few days ago, and at around
this point I woke up.

Now, I find this very interesting, for a couple reasons. The first is,
currently, the state of my box is such that there are many books on it, from
the divine comedy, to all of the greek epics, and some other random ones here
and there, and any time I pick one of them up, it's usually either on the top,
of a pile, or somewhere in the middle of a pile, and when I put it back, I
organize it in my organized mess sort of way, placing the piles of books onto
eachother and between eachother and so on, placing maybe the mythology seperate
from the prose, and maybe I'll have the bible on there on top of Asimov's guide
to the bible, and so on. The reason I say all of this, the reason I find this
so fascinating, is when I woke up, I remember thinking "wow, what an
interesting idea to me to think that my father held the metamorpheses so dear
to him." Then I remember thinking "well, unfortanetly that is not the case" and
I quickly came to my waking senses and knew that of course he wouldn't have
even one "revered" copy of the metamorpheses, much less four, and it certainly
wouldn't be a book that he would read for pleasure (Clancy and Dan Brown are
more my father's style, when he does read). But that thought did not stay for
long, and instead the next thing that came into my mind was "Surely this dream
has to do with my own conception of what I find revered myself" and I then
thought, "Well, I have the Metamorpheses right there, maybe I should read some
of it" so I checked the time, and found that it was quite early, today being a
Tuesday, I did not have to got to training, and it was before seven, and I was
actually quite well rested. In fact, when I checked my tablet, it delayed for a
bit like it will do sometimes, and it said the time was "10:48" if my memory
serves, and when it corrected, it was something like "6:5x" where I don't
remember what x is, which means I had gotten five good sleeping cycles, which
is about ideal I think. So I started to get up, remarking to myself quite
amazingly about my lack of groginess (indeed, I think coffee is the worst now,
and I will continue on with my experiment of diet, which I will lay out the
rules of in a bit) and I made my way to my chair, and I started to look through
the piles of books to find the metamorpheses, and to my amazement, it had it's
own corner of my box, it was sitting there, on it's own, almost even presenting
itself to me. I saw this and thought "Wow, that's amazing" and it truely is
amazing, because in my memory, when I arranged the piles, I put the Iliad, the
Odessey, the Aeneid, and then the Metamorpheses all into one "Greek Epics"
pile, and so far the most I have done as far as reading any of them would be to
pick one out and flip through it and put it back, but here, somehow, was
sitting all on it's own, the metamorpheses. This is fascinating to me, because
even the concept of the book ending up on it's own in my subconscious, as if I
subconsciously knew that I would dream about it, is rather absurd, and I
certainly did not place it there on it's own to be a part of my "to read"
section. Indeed, I think the most likely explanation is this, now that I think
about it further, is that I had decided I had wanted to flip through some of
the Greek epics, and so I picked up the Iliad, which was on the top of the
pile, and I flipped through it, and then I picked up the Odeyssey, and I
flipped through it, and then I took that whole pile and placed it on top of
another pile (and right now, there is one pile of about 8-9 books all stacked
up, which have Hamilton's Mythology, the Iliad, the Odyessey, and the Aenied on
the top of it 90 degrees from the original pile) and I opened up the
Metamorphes, and I flipped through it, and then when I was done, and in this
case "done" means I literally flipped through the pages for 10 seconds, rather
than restoring the piles, I just put the Metamorpheses down on the box, and
either sat there and read something else, or I got up and did something, or I
made my way to the restroom, or whatever, and I just left it there. So that is
the most likely explanation of how the Metamorpheses got there, on it's own.

What I find profound about it is that I had not remembered doing this, and I
certainly had no intention to pick up that work before any of the others
(indeed, I have this idea that I should "get through" the Iliad before I go on
to any of the other works) so the fact that I dreamed about it and then had the
inclination to go and read it is fascinating to me. Obviously so, as I just
spent the last fourty minutes writing about it.

It's amazing to me how that seems to happen every time. I get dream from the
night before, and I determine that it is quite a breif dream, and that it will
be easy to talk about and use as a stepping off point for my journal, and I
think about how shourt this description of the dream will be, but then when I
get into it it ineveitably becomes dozens of lines of unbroken explantion and
interpretation that overwhelms the rest of the jounal article. I have a
tendancy to talk about dreams more than most other things, it seems, and other
events in my life don't take as much precedence.

Speaking of that, last night, before I went to bed, after I had eaten, I was in
my room going back and forth as to whether or not I should visit my father. I
had meant to go over the weekend, as I said, and I had gone on Friday, as I
have already written about, but Sunday came and went and I didn't go, and it
came to be Monday evening after I had eaten, and I was considering letting this
day come and go in the same way, and I was sitting in my chair contemplating
whether or not I wanted to begin to dive into another work of Shakespeare, and
I decided that I should indeed go and visit my father.

So I called up my mother, who immediately just started talking about the state
of my father as soon as I answered, and telling me his Kidney functions are up
(which is the wrong way that we want them to go, it means his Kidneys are being
overworked and he is still not properly flushing fluids like he should) but
that his speech is getting better, he tried to walk but got light headed as
soon as they got him out of the bed, and so on about certain numbers. She
mentioned that his Neutrophils, which are the aspect of his blood that will
indicate that the bone marrow transfusion is working, are going up, so that
looks good, and his white blood cells seem to be making more again, and so on,
so all of that looks good. Also, they talked about the potential of releasing
him from the hospital and going to a rehab facility to work on walking and on
speech and all of that good stuff, which would also be good, and that would
only be a couple of weeks, like 10-14 days, and then he could come home, so
that would be good as well. So there is a lot that looks hopeful. But like I
said, my mom basically just started spewing this into the phone as soon as I
called her, and at some point during a pause, I interjected myself and said,
"Okay, I don't mean to interrupt you, I'm happy to listen, but I was
considering coming down to visit and just wanted to make sure everything was
good" and she reeled back a bit, and she said yeah, everything was good, and
that Papa was there, and he was to spend the night, and I said, "Oh, okay,
good, so I'll go down there and shoot the shit with him" and so we finished the
conversation on that, and I made my way down.

There was not much notable that happened there. I came into the room, and this
time I was not sure of the room, it felt wrong, so I went in cautiously, and
saw that Papa was sitting there, and I saw my dad, so I stepped in, and said
hello, and made my way to the couch. The notable thing about this visit was,
first that the TV was off for the first ever since I have been there, and
second that my dad seemed to be a lot more somber today than he has been. That
was my initial impression. And the only reason that is something to note is not
because I feel as though "Oh no, he is more somber, that indicates something"
but more it is noteworthy because usually my impression is "wow, his spirits
are a lot higher than I thought they would be," and I thought maybe he wasn't
so excited about Papa staying there with him, or something else. But as we went
on, we continued to have conversation, and we talked about this and that kind
of bullshit, and Papa was the one to mostly steer the conversation. Something
that struck me was that Papa mentioned Russian, and I was a bit taken aback by
that, as he did not know whether I had told dad about that yet or not (not that
it's a secret or anything) and we were on the topic of language anyway, I
forget how it transitioned to that, but the second thing was that my dad
already knew that I had taken up that undertaking, and when I said, "Oh, I'm
surprised" he said, "News travels through the grapevine pretty fast" and I left
it at that. I determined that Granny and Papa probably told my mom about it
when they talk, because they talk a lot, and my mom must have told my dad about
it at some point, I'm just surprised it got there. That seems like something
that wouldn't be a topic of conversation, but I guess it is, so that is that I
guess.

Besides all of that, my fathers spirits started to lighten up, and I became
more comfortable through the conversation (I hate when I feel like I am walking
on eggshells in any conversation) and eventually during pause, I stood up and
announced my intention to leave, so I shared some goodbyes and made my leave.


