# 20180713 Diet - Visions then Dreams: Walking with Janet, BJJ in Garage, Takashi and a video game, Diarehha in the tub
So yesterday night I had a lot of dreams. Like, a lot of dreams, and they were
all I think somewhat connected but mostly not. I want to at first just get the
dreams out on paper before I actually go into any details, just so I'm able to
put it together a bit better in my head.

So the first dream had to do with my dream version of Duck Creek. That version
of Duck Creek is actually very similar to the version of irl, but I am getting
into details now and I don't want to do that yet. The next part of the dream
was in the garage of my parents house, which has had been a location of my
dreams in the past, but it had to do with BJJ. The next part of the dream I was
definitely playing a game, and this game had six bosses, each with two forms,
and I fought the two forms of the first boss, before I interacted with Takashi
a bit. And the last part of the dream had to do with me inputing a code into
the sink of some dream person's apartment, and that turned the sink into
diahhrea. So yeah. A lot of stuff going on this night.

I do feel like it is important to note, that since the Chiropracter has told me
about ginger and turmeric, yesterday after work I went to whole foods and got
a bunch of those roots, and then I went to Target and got myself a blender, and
I started experimenting with different sorts of Kale and spinich shakes. The
first one I took a bunch of Kale and Spinich and Ginger and Garlic and Turmeric
and put a bunch of that shit all together in the blender and tried to blend it
up, but it wasn't blending at all, like, not at all, and at first I thought it
was just because it was a piece of shit blender (and it was pretty cheap
compared to the other blenders on the shelf) but more it had to do with the
fact that I just put whole chunks of shit in there. So I opened it up, and
started taking the stuff out, and then fed it in one pice at a time after
choping it up (and mind you, this shit was wet and gross because I had a bit of
water in there as well) and when I did all of that (and I think my hand are
premanently green now, as they are green this next morning even after washing
them at least a half a dozen times with soap since then) it blended up pretty
good. But then when I went to try and drink it, it was really potent, to the
point where I couldn't take more than a sip without my sinuses flaring up
something fierce, and at first I thought this might be the garlic. So I washed
everything up, and I chopped up more managable portions of everything, minus
the garlic, and I used orange juice this time, and I fed everything into the
blender, and went for round two, this time using a good amount of ice as well.
And this time it came up much more like a slushie to my surprise, and I was
honestly quite astonished at how well the thing crushed up the ice into a sort
of almost solid form, but this time I could not chug at all, there was simply
no way, as the form of the thing was like a slushie, like I said, and so I
poured that one out and decided to go for one last shot. Oh, and also, the
drink was still really potent, like, horse radishy kind of potent, and I still
didn't know what that was. So I tasted some of the ginger root, and I promptly
realized that that was the potency that I had tasted in both drinks before, and
so I decided to forgoe the ginger root and the garlic for this last drink, and
just use orange juice, kale, spinich, turmiric root, and ice. And so I did all
of that, this time in more reasonable porportions, and this time the drink came
out drinkable, (although still a little too slushie like for what I want) and
actually did not taste horrible. So after I finished drinking it, I proceeded
to cook the salmon (over a pound of it in one filet) and sweet potatoes (which
I am honestly not too excited about) and I ate that for my dinner.

So after I finished everything (I didn't finish the sweet potatoes, I decided
to put butter in them and I think that was a mistake, but I think I am not too
interested in sweet potatoes anyway), I cleaned up the horrible mess I made as
best I could, and I then proceeded to lay down to read. Now, I probably did a
few other things before I did all of this, but pretty soon after I finish
eating and cleaning, I lay down to sleep, and began to read. And as I began to
read, I started to notice I was a little quesy (although not overly so) but
more I felt like I was almost starting to get a sort of out of body experience,
not in a "a feel high" sort of way, but I started to dissassociate the words
from my experience, and reading became difficult, although in a different way
than the way I talked about after I eat PBJ, but still I felt as though I was
maybe just a little uneasy would be the best way to put it. Although this
uneasiness extended beyond just the simple stomach sort of uneasiness. I felt
as though I were done reading, and instead I just wanted to contemplate things.

So I put the tablet down, and turned to my side and wrapped the blanket over
me, and as I did this, my imagination started to run wild. I began getting
ideas, musical ideas, that just appeared to me, and I tried to figure out from
what piece or work these musical ideas were coming from, and I couldn't figure
it out. You see, usually when I have musical ideas, they tend to come from
other sonatas or symphonies or other such works that I have listened to, and
that's where the ideas come from, but I morph them slightly in my head, and I
tell myself that this is my own original musical idea. Either that, or what I
am able to come up with is mostly random as far as melody goes, and creates no
movement or emotion but simply exists as a simple string of notes. Well, I will
say that these musical ideas, they came to me in random bursts, and I would try
and focus on one and repeat it and try and attach it to something I had heard
before, but I couldn't, so I feel I was actually getting these ideas, ideas of
decent sounding music, entirely on my own. But like I said, each of these ideas
came in sorts of bursts, and I am not talented enough with improv or ear
training to be able to write down what the ideas were or know how I would
recreate them.

Also, in addition to this, I had visions of my brain. Now, whether these were
actual visions of the brain, or images of what I think my brain is like, I
don't know. But as I was thinking about how my analytical musical abilities are
so well developed, but my artistic ear and improv and creative abilites are
not, I saw a whole network of neurons on one side (and it happened to be the
left, which is why I suppose this is the "vision of the vision" of my brain)
and on the other side, the right side, I saw a few barely firing neurons that
were being overwhelmed by the left. And as I saw all of this, I immedietly and
consciously interpreted it as my musical capabilities, and I thought, "I wonder
how I could develop the right side" and I knew that the best way would be to
get a teacher. And at about that point, I started to ponder just exactly what
effect this kale spinich turmeric shake was having on me, and I considered what
sort of wild dreams I might have, and I fell into sleep.

Well, as I already said, the first part of the dream was walking through my
dream version of Duck Creek. Now, this version of Duck Creek, is very similar
to the real version, except the creek and the banks are exageratted, and the
entire thing is just a little bit more grand. Well, as I was beginning my walk,
I was walking with my mom and Janet Bresson, and eventully we got to a turning
point, and my mom went left to our house (like we do some times) and Janet and
I decided to keep walking along the rest of the path, and at that point I was
able to talk with her. Now the interpretation of this part of the dream is
pretty straight forward, as I was thinking about Janet this entire time I was
making the shake, and thinking about how much I wanted to pick her brain about
how to make it and what to put in it, and etc etc. so I think that there is not
much to contemplate there.

The next part of the dream has me returning to my parents home (and I think
this part of the dream was disconnect from duck creek, in fact I know it is)
and while I was there I entered my parents garage. I don't remember from which
side I entered, but I think it was the inside entrance, and when I got in
there, I was surprised to see a bunch of people rolling. Chris was there, and a
few other BJJ faces, although not many that I recognize, and I think a few were
just dream faces that were my BJJ people dream faces, but what surprised me is
that I know Kyle was there as well as I beleive my mom, and they were rolling
together, although I know Kyle was rolling there and I'm not sure about my mom.
Anyway, Troy I know was also there, and he mentioned he was going to put on a
round timer, and all of this is very much because today is a Friday, so I think
I was anticipating the open mat that was to arrive today. However, the fact
that it was in my parents garage left me a bit befuddled.

So next up, we have the video game dream. Now, I forget which part of the dream
happened first, and which was next. In fact, I think I remember, and if this
wasn't the order than fuck it it is now. So the dream started with me in a sort
of multi bedroom apartment. Now that I think about the layout, I'm thinking
back to the apartment the Stevesy, Turkey, and Waildog had together, but the
only thing I know about this dream apartment is that it had an upstairs area
with a sort of communal area, which is where I was playing the game that I will
describe later, but there was a sort of hallway, at the end of which led down
some stairs (a lot similar to Jaq's apartment at A&M now that I think about it)
but I didn't ever venture down the stairs (and indeed I don't even know what is
down there) but I remember going and peeking into one of the rooms, and in that
room was Takashi in a full suit, like business suit, but the kind of suit a
celebrity would wear to an event if that celeb was trying to make a statement,
because it was a sort of bright navy blue (it was navy blue, but very saturated
navy would be the better way to describe the color) and the while shirt he had
under it was striped from top to bottom very noticably with thin red stripes,
and he also had I tie but I can't recall what sort of tie it was. Also, the
shoes were you typical very fancy very expensive dress shoes, the kind of shoes
that say "I want to stand out in a dignified way" or something like that.
Anyway, I look into this room, and I am brought immediatly by two emotions at
once. The first emotion was a sort of recognition of a friend that I have not
seen for a long time, and a want to embrace him, and the second was a very
strange feeling that I don't know how to deal with. It was a feeling of "What
would they think if they knew I was fraternizing with a gay man" which, I have
had my suspicions, but I know Taka isn't gay, at least I am pretty sure of that
fact, and he has actually mentioned to me before that one of his friend
girl/girl friend weird relationship things, her father thought he was gay due
to the way he interacted with the girl, but regardless, the fact that that is
the thought I had, not only that he was gay but also the repulsion of my
thought what others would think of me if they knew I was hanging out with a gay
man, I'm not sure if that's some lingering homophobia that I wish I didn't have
inside of me or if it's something else. I don't think it's homophobia, but
instead the notion of insecurity in not my sexuality but in what other people
might think of who I am and what I stand for. Now that I think about it, I hate
being put into boxes and being labeled, and I think that, while labeling is
something that has to be done and is something that is a good way to let people
know where you stand on a certain subject in a very brief and informative way,
I hate when those labels are looked at as anything more than labels, and I
think that may be where my "drawn back" feeling comes from in regards to this
portion of the dream.

Anyway, after I drew back from him, he walked out of his room, and I was back
in the living room, and he asked me if everything was okay, and that we haven't
seen eachother in a long time, and I immediately sort of halted my withdrawal.
I don't remember if we shared a hug, although thinking about it I think we did,
although it was not a very memorable or important aspect of the dream. So we
hugged, and then I mentioned that I wanted to play this new game.

So I start this game, and this game became the dream, as video games do in
dreams, and there is not much I want to say about this dream except this. One,
the game was pretty rudimentary as far as texturing and open world design goes.
It started in one of the edges of a box, and the structure of it was as a sort
of big box that had a bunch of littler boxes representing buildings in the
dream, and the first street that you can get to has the first boss on it. Well,
I remember flying around a bit and I had a sword, and I used the sword to beat
the boss, which was nothing more than a large robot thing, also very
unimaginative, but when I did to my surprise, the boss respawned, and when it
did, the sword I was holding turned many colors, and the boss came back also
with his joints being his weak points also being multiple colors, and I
determined that I would have to use the different parts of the sword, which was
a very large and thin sword, so each of these colored sections had quite a
large window of forgivness, to hit the colored sections of the robot, and the
colors had to match when they did. Takashi was sort of just there when all of
this was going on, and he began explaining the whole thing to me, but I told
him that I had it figured out, and that I knew what to do. Well, I proceeded to
beat this second form of the boss just as easily as the first form, but this
time with the added gimmick of the colors and the swords, and after I did,
Takashi then explained to me the nature of the rest of the game, how there were
six bosses total, each with two forms, and they all got harder and harder and
the first boss was more of a tutorial than anything. I said that I got the
idea, and I stopped playing the game.

This is when the next portion of the dream started, and I don't remember if
Takashi left and someone else came in, or if the person who was Takashi just
changed like people do in dreams into this non-descript dream face person, but
in this next part of the dream, I went to the restroom, and when I did, I had
heard about this thing you could input into the sink to make it procure poopy
sewage water instead of regular water, and I had done it before and entered it
again and when I did this before I remembered it going back to regualar water,
and there was no harm. Well, I wanted to try it again, just to see, and I
entered in "National Lampoon" into the keyboard there at the sink, and it did
indeed turn the water from water to poopy diahhrea water. So when it started
doing this, I had that moment like "well of course it does still work" and so I
tried to enter it in to reverse what was going on, but it didn't work, and I
spent a good amount of time trying to reverse the procees. I remember looking
at the toilet, because I remember thinking if I could turn off water to the
toilet it would turn off the water entierly and that would fix the problem, but
when I looked at the source of water there was no valve and instead it was
being controlled by this module that the only input to was this keyboard, so I
determined that there was no physical way to make it stop that made since, so I
needed to figure it out in a different way. At this point I remember becoming
rather embarrased at what I had done, and frantically began trying to think of
ways to cover it up, so I removed the head of the sink, which was detachable
for whatever reason, and I directed the spray of the poopy water into the bath
tub, and the tub started to fill with this sewage diarehha water, and I had
determined that at least that had bought me more time (as though draining poopy
water into the tub was better than draining it into the sink) and I tried to
think of a way make it stop. I evaluated all of my options, but all of them
seemed silly, and the notion of telling the person who wasn't Takashi anymore
but was the person living in that apartemnt was still too embarrassing, but I
was also coming to the acceptance of the fact that hiding this sort of thing
would not work either, so I was still deliberating all of my options. As I was
doing this, I think I walked out, and I was sort of determined to swallow my
pride and embarassment and tell him about the situation, and as I walk out, it
was actually he who made the first intearcation. He took his penis out and
began peeing on the little chiuajua dog that he had, a furry little shit of a
dog, and he did so with glee in his face, and as he was doing it he said to me
"Check this out, I can piss on him and clean him at the same time. I needed to
pee and he needed to be cleaned, so it's two birds with one stone", which is
obviously completly absurd, but him doing that gave me comfort that he would
not give any care towards the situation I had created in his restroom. Well,
before I could get anything out, and after he finished peeing on his dog and
telling me about it, he immediately looked into the restroom and saw the
sinking still spewing diarehha water into the tub, and he saw that and he
said, "Bro, I'm sorry man, that sink does that sometimes and I don't know how
to fix it, I'm really sorry about that," and at that point, I had resolved to
tell him about the whole situation, and how I was the one who entered in the
"National Lampoon" into the keyboard which caused the sink to do that, but at
his apology, I considered telling him anyway, but instead of doing that it was
easier (and fewer words to say, and flowed better with the conversation) to
just say, "Nah, it's all good, I wasn't sure what to do about it so I had it
flow into the bathroom" and at that he said "yeah, I'm really sorry again,
don't worry about cleaning it or anything, I'll take care of it" and I have no
clue how he planned to take care of it, but he had put the burden on himself,
and I remember thinking about how I didn't tell him about my role in the whole
thing causing this situation right now, and I even remeber thinking about how I
could reveal to him why it happens, and how that could be benefit to him, but I
didn't do those things, and instead just let him take care of it. Around that
point is when I woke up.

Now, the concept of Diarehha flowing everywhere makes sense to me as a sort of
fear I have of this Kale shake that I just made, as I did make a comment to
myself after I drank it about "I wonder what my shit is going to be like
tomorrow" but there is clearly a lot more at play here than that. In fact, I
may have met another character now that I think about, although I don't know
his name. The other two, the adjudicator and the tyrant, both had very obvious
names to me, but this one does not. The Bro, is the first name that comes to
mind, but that seems a little to generic to be a character in my mythology. I
guess, when I say this one doesn't have an immediate name that comes to mind,
that's a lie, because the bro is the name that comes to mind, I just don't like
it. So yeah, I guess I have met "The Bro".

So I have spent the better part of the past eighty minutes writing about this
now, and feel like I still want to keep writing, although again I don't have
anything in particular I want to write about. The two most memorable features
of this dream are my intearctions with Takashi and my interactions with the
sink in the restroom. Both of them don't really represent anything profound,
but they are interesting little pieces none the less.

I know yesterday, Linda went home and Jason should have arrived, so I will plan
to visit tonight. I was considering Bikram, but after taking over a week off of
that, I don't know how much I will want to go there any more, as the rigidity
is quite silly in my opinion. On the one hand, I like the really rigid
structure of it, but the concept of flow is just as important to me, more so
actually, and I really hate how the nature of Bikram is to force you into a
very specific posture in a specific order the same time every time in the same
way. It's good for me to do that just because I don't like it, because doing
things you don't like is good sometimes, but at the same time it's silly and
dumb, because I know I get more benefit when I actually go in and do the
postures that I feel as though I need, and I flow from one to the next in the
ways that make sense for my body at that moment, I feel that I can get more
benefit from doing that than by imposing an artificial (and in my opinion some
times questionable) structure on the whole thing. So I will certainly pass on
that today, but I might go over the weekend or next week if I am feeling so
inspired.


