# 20180812
So I'm back to write some more. I'm not sure if I have anything to say or
not, but I am here to write either way. I actually don't believe I am wholly
inspired to write, and will leave this entry till later.

Currently, I have been up since probably five or so in the morning. I woke up
with heartburn, and I was trying to sort out some russian words in my head in
my dreams last night, which is always a good sign. I do think I like the idea
of using Russian phrases after work. I'm not sure if it makes since to do this
after or before I eat. I think after. That makes the most sense.

What I did last night, was I took three sentences.

Как дела? Хорошо. Отлично!
Небо было голубым. Просто голубым.
Ты хочешь поехать со мной? Да, с удовольствием!

And I wrote the first one out ten times in a row, then the second one I wrote
out ten times, then the third. Then I wrote each one five times. Then each on
their own as I thought about it.

I'm not sure what makes the most sense to do, but I like the idea of writing
like this, to reinforce the words and phrases. I think it will work best in
helping with vocabulary.

So this will certainly be something that I do more often. I like the way I am
analyzing the children's story, and I like this technique now as well.
Eventually, the reading of the childrens stories will turn into reading in a
more organic way (and you can very easily see the progression, as I stop
anaylyzing the form of each word, and it becomes obvious, I make less, notes,
and my reading becomes more fluid, and I only make notes on the "words that are
not obvious"). And this writing out of phrases, that will become writing in
Russian. So using both of these things, I think I start to see myself get on a
path to learning Russian for real. It's sort of cool.

The thing I am concerned about is motivation. I am certainly not always
motivated to learn in this way, and getting myself to do it is something like,
"OKAY, now I have to do this... Let's bring it up and do it." This is a lot
better now though, because I have something to do.

Something that is missing is the reading of textbooks. I certainly want to read
textbooks, but that is something that I think should almost take a back burner
to the other things. Oh, and also Duolingo. That is a fun game, something I can
do in the evenings for whatever the fuck reason, so that's neat. It's just a
fun way to get myself engaged.

So that was last night. I had a dream, and I was trying to sort out some of the
words in my dreams, and I remember there was a word that had four iterations
that were all teh same word, when I knew that they should be different words.
That is something I need to do as well.

I think I have just realized a sort of solution to my problem. I want to learn
one word at a time, and in the case of a noun, I should find something like
three or four different phrases that use the noun in a different way. So for
something like ball (мяч) I would come up with phrases like.

The ball is very smooth.
I threw the ball off the cliff.
My ball is shinier than her ball.
I shot an arrow at the ball.

In fact, now that I think about it, I would like to come up with a short story
about the ball, so that the ball is used in different ways.

So something like. The balls are very shiny. I picked up a ball, and she also
picked one up. My ball was shinier than her ball. I threw the ball. She shot
the ball with an arrow. The inside of the ball contained more balls. Inside a
ball is more balls.

Obviously this example needs some work, but I want to come up with ways to use
the word in a short story, in a way that I can memorize it, and practice each
sentence. This way, I get an idea about how to actually use the word. And then,
once I do this, I inadvertently learn other words. And eventually I could start
learning word and adjective pairs. And adverb and verb pairs. And participles.
There is so much to learn, and I have to stretch my creativity in doing so.
Coming up with these stories will be the tricky part, but I will get better at
it, especially as I start learning more and more Russian.

Something I have noticed from reading the childrens story, is that adverbs are
actually used quite a lot, and I will get the most bang for my buck learning
these adverbs, because they are indeclinable. It's a nice feature of them.
Russian is spoken in such a more intuitive way than english. I love it so much.

The tricky thing will be learning the prepositions. But that will come as I
learn more words. For instnace, Liel has given me the dialog of two people
talking about a trip to the beach, and interesting of one and the other in this
trip. I like this story a lot, and I can use it to help myself learn the words
Ехать и хочеть, meaning "to go" and "to want". There is also поехать. The verbs
are the most interesting words, because the verbs themselves have their present
tense forms, and their past tense forms, and then there is the infinitive form,
and the participle form. And the participle is entirely an adjective. So for
each verb, there is something like forty different contexts in which it can be
used. It's so cool. Like really cool. It's maybe a little daunting, but I know
that once I start to get a hang for how verbs are usually declined, I will
start to get it, and the brain will start to create patterns and pathways. It's
really exciting.

I am so excited, to be totally honest, of thinking in another language. I
started to get glimpses of it. Russian is such a coarse language, and I love
it. They get straight to the point with their words. A sentence in english
which has three phrases "the boy went to the store" has six words, but in
Russian, you would just say "boy went store" and the context and the
declination tells you what you need to know about what is happening. It's
really cool, and I'm really excited to get there. It's just a matter of, I need
to get excited for learning the individual things.

That's the rub, I think. I am more excited now about actually getting to the
point, then I am about doing the things that I need to do to get to that point.
I know I can't get excited about learning these things as much as I am about
actually knowing the language, but that is where the discipline comes in. I
need to have discipline for these things. That's why I like the idea of
learning these things after I eat. What has been working well for me is, I
analyze stories after BJJ at work, after I have some snack, (mushrooms and
avocado). That has been an enjoyable experience. I just need to streamline it.
Once I add the phrase practice after I eat in the evenings, that will I think
start to show pretty incredible progress. It's just important that I stick to
it. I need to figure out when teh best time to stretch my creativity will be.
Certainly not right now, in the morning. That's not the time generelly. I like
using this morning time to talk about my dreams, and such. But the creativity.
I think the creativity will be best either when I'm eating, or immediately
after I'm done eating. I should just open up a document, after I'm done eating.
(I will try this this evening and see how it goes) and find some phrase, and
come up with ways to decline a word in that phrase into other phrases, into a
way that hopefully creates something of a coherent story.

I read Tolstoy's openning line of Anna Karenina. In english it goes, "All happy
families are the same, but unhappy families are unhappy in their own way." and
in the original Russian, I looked at it and the unhappy and family are
declined. Well, they have to be, because that is how Russian is spoken. But in
english, this is lost. Instead unhappy is repeated and family is repeated. We
at least have the words "happy" and "unhappy", so that is the most similar to
the russian, but there is something beatiful to me about using the same word in
the same sentence in a different declination. It's really cool. I love it.

I want to come up with sentences like this for whatever word it is that I want
to learn. And as I do it, I should choose words that first follow the standard
rules, but as I do this more, I will expand out into words that have
exceptions. But I want to reinforce the standards. For instance, if someone
said that you were "un-glad", an english speaker would say "unglad, how quaint"
but they will still know what you mean. So I want to learn the words like
"happy" first that decline in the standard way to "unhappy", and then when I
get to the words like "glad", and I say "unglad", I can be correct and have
Liel, or wiktionary, or whatever, tell me that "glad" doesn't decline to
"unglad" and instead you just have to say "not glad" because glad doesn't obey
the declination rules.

That is not the best example, I'm sure I could come up with a better english
example, but Russian doesn't work like that really, and well, it's everywhere
in Russian. I was looking at the word "sky" Небо yesteday, and I was looking at
the way it declines, and I found that the plural of небо doesn't decline in the
standard ways. Which makes since, because when are you going to use the plural
of sky? In english we would say "skies" but even then, I'm not sure of a
context when you would use the word skies in english. "The skies were filled
with planes" would make sense, but only because you are talking about "the sky
of england, and the sky of germany, and the sky of italy, and etc". We know
that the skies of all these places are really connected to the same sky, but in
a poetic sense, you could say "the skies were filled with planes" to
characterize the sky in a sense. So it makes sense, that the plural of skies
would be declined in a more poetic way than a regular word.

Same thing with Sun. Or Wind.

So my point is, I want to find a word, like ball, which declines in all of the
standard ways. And ball, ball is a standard word that I imagine every russian
speaker should know. But then there are words like dog, собака. And this word
also declines in the standard ways. But the ways that you use the word dog are
probably different than the way use use ball. And собака is femanine, where as
мяч is masculine. So I want to learn words like this first. But I have to be
careful. I must come up with phrases that emphasize these words. I don't want
to try and create too much for my brain to learn at once. I think it would be
best if I make up a story about a ball, and in that story, there are something
like four easy to memorize sentences using ball in a few different ways. Then
for a different "standard" masculine word, I come up with another story, and
this word will also decline in teh standard ways, but different then the way
that the ball declines. So for instance, using dog again, the dog will be used
in the dative more, where as ball would not as much. So in this way, I can get
a sense of how to use these different cases.

I also need to get a sense of when to use prepositions in Russian. For
instance, the preposition по has no english equivelent (or rather, it has many
english equivilents but they all depend on the context). It's futile to try and
think of по as an english word in a simlar way that you might think of собака
as the word dog. So these words, it will be important to figure out ways that
they are used, and get an intuition for them that way.

It's funny, I said that I wouldn't have much to talk about, but here I am so
many words later still talking about things in Russian. I don't know what all I
have said, I don't feel like reading back on it, but now I have realized that I
am simply ten minutes off of an hour at this point. Coffee is a strange thing.

Something I want to talk about. After I orgasmed quite by accident (well, as
accidental as it can get when you are continually edging and moving from source
to source of sexual related content), I went again, and intentionally orgasmed.
I started masterbating in my chair, and then as I got there, I went into the
other room, laid down, and came to completion there. After doing that, I felt
much better, and I said, "Okay, I am completely repulsed by this now, and I
feel a lot better". I think the issue was in fact that the orgasm was so un
provoked, or rather, unwelcome, that I wasn't able to "get the most out of it."
so to speak, and then, after I did it again with the intent of "getting
something out of my orgasm" I felt much better, and more like myself again. I
went back to the mindset of, well, the mindset that I don't have a habit of
masterbation now, and that such a thing is not something that I want to give
into. It's a strange thing. I should stop writing about it now though. I
certainly don't want to masterbate now, that I am drinking coffee. Combining
this substance with the orgasm would be much to much, and would certainly
spiral to something that, while I would be able to control, I would certainly
give in to. That is, once I decide to give in to it, I would give in way too
much, and as a result, it would lead only to a whole day of masterbating and
feeling shame from it. There is so much more to do with the day than
masterbate, and if I masterbate now, I know that it won't stop, and nothing
will get done. Coffee must be treated with the utmost respect. I like the idea
of jogging for a half mile every so often on the days that I caffinate myself.
I will work on whatever, and bring myself to go for a jog ever so often in
between working. Coffee has a very intesting effect, and I must harness
properly and with serious respect if I am to play with this sort of fire. I
need to pay my respects to prometheus if I am to play with what he has given
us.

So yeah, I am not much sure of what I should write about now for this last
three minutes. I do believe that I want to continue to work on my lit analyzer,
but only after I take a breather from this. I need to reset my brain a bit
after this article. I will go for a short jog, and maybe make some eggs. That
would be good. I need to eat food, and eggs would be good.

Something I will say, I think the peanut butter I have gotten, natural creamy
peanut butter from sams, has caused indegestion. Thta is what woke me up from
my Russian dreams, and well, I ate a lot of this peanut butter last night, with
not enough steak at all. Not enough meat and too much of this peanut butter
caused heartburn, so I will back off of teh heartburn.

That is somethngi I want to say. I very much like that I have excluded bread
from my diet now. I feel as though I have a much better handle on how foods
effect me, and I am feeling much better about high fat and high meat diet. So
this peanut butter, fuck this peanut butter. I have regular jif peanut butter,
and I will go back to that now, and I will keep this creamy peanut butter, it
seems quite a waste to get rid of it, but I think I might go back to the almond
butter in the future. It is more expensive, but I think it is the best. I will
look into better creamy peanut butter, but I think this is something that would
be best not to be cheap on.

So yeah, enough of that. I am ceatainly done writing for now, but I do
anticipate that I will come back to this later today. I could be inspired to
write more really bad rough drafts of my novella of the hermit later, and I
need to get the really bad rough draft on to paper so that I can go back and
write it again later. So that is that. I will be back. For now though, I need
to keep moving. Coffee has this sedative effect on me, a sort of numbing
effect, and I need to combat it. I need to work my brain, but I need to not
exhaust my brain. My body and my brain need to stay connected in order for this
to work. It's a strange thing that I feel right now, but I like it, it just
requires discipline. So now I will go excersize that dicipline. I will probably
the next time I write just go directly to the hermit section. I feel my brain
starting to give in now. There is part of me that doesn't want to stop, but I
need to connect my body to my brain now, so I will stop here.

This is me stopping. I'll be back.
