So last night I had two dreams. The first was set in my parents living room. In
my dad's chair was sitting Jason, and on the couch was my mom. I walk in from
the hallway, and I overhear that they are on the phone with George Carlin. I go
over and sit in the other chair, and Jason asks me if I would like to talk with
Carlin, because he might be able to help me if I talk through with him.

I start talking with Carlin, and I ask him if in his time, he ever felt a sort
of existential dread, and apathy towards everything around him. He does not
relate, which is what I expected, and I become slightly annoyed because Jason
thought that this is where the conversation might become fruitful.

The conversation continues, and Carlin starts to talk about his childhood. He
talks about how he would throw flaming balls stuffed into socks over a barbed
wire fence, and taht's how he got his existential angst out.

Later, my dad comes out of the study. He has been practicing his walking, and
is doing all right at it.

Jason then says that my dad might want to hear this. Jason tells Carlin that my
dad is there, and Carlin starts riffing on some classic 80s rock song. My dad
gets really excited at this, and when Jason asks if he would be interested in
visiting Carlin to see this performance live, my dad, to the surprise of Jason,
is enthusiastic about going. When asked if he can because of his cancer, my dad
replies that he wants to go anyway.

That was the end of that dream.

The second dream takes place at the UTD soccer fields. We are playing ultimate
with the current UTD team, and we play some points. We play a couple of points
as part of the scrimmage, and I am more or less enjoying myself, but I want to
know when we will get to the drilling part of practice.

I ask Brian and he says he's not sure. He asks me if I'm interested in some
alcohol, and I tell him that I can't, because alcohol is part of the UA and
probation as well.

At this point, Jessica Schoppe comes by, and asks Brian if he is interested in
something. She was being cryptic, I forget in what way she was being cryptic,
but Brian mentions that he's interested, and they go to the other side of the
field, and they start enjoying some beverage or something.

So after they go, I consider leaving. Kyle begins to leave as well, but he
looks like he wants to get away from me. I follow him, and ask him why he
wants to get away so bad, but he just keeps walking away.

I follow him, and I'm able to track him. We start going into the UTD campus,
but it becomes something of a whole winding narrow trail. Eventually, it
becomes a sort of urban environment with all sorts of boxes and things all
woven between eachother, and it becomes something of a maze to navigate. We get
to a point, where there is are multiple ways to go, and Kyle tries to lose me.
He goes up one area, but as he starts going up, he comes back down. I go up,
but realize that he went back, and attempt to find him again. I see him go to
the left, and up some boxes, and so I follow him up the boxes. When I start
going up the boxes, I realize he has thrown me off again. As I go back to the
fork/roundabout area, I see he has left his phone on one of the boxes, and I
hear him running back towards the soccer fields, towards the campus where we
came from.

I grab his phone, thinking I have outsmarted him, because when he comes to find
his phone, he will arrive at me instead (the logic doesn't make too much sense,
but dream logic never does), and when I put his phone in my pocket, it starts
vibrating like mad. I ignore it at first, but then I think my plan is
backfiring, because I realize that he will come and try to find the phone here,
but he won't find it.

I then check what the messages he is getting say, and they read, in a bunch of
different messages,

G
E
TT

O
UU
T

All in succession like that. I'm not 100% on which letters were doubled, but
the messages were in a row like that, and they said "GET OUT" when you put it
together.

I wake up at this point, pretty deeply disturbed. It's 7:50 when I wake up, and
I lay there for a bit before I actually get up to start getting ready for work.
