# 20180821
So today was the first day I went to pee in a cup. I drove to the bank to get
myself the 800 dollars neccesary to pay them for the privledge to do so, then I
drove another thirty minutes to the place, where I was given the opportunity to
show my penis explicitly to another man so that he might watch me urinate
violently into a cup. It was great, just wonderful, the best experience I have
ever had the opportunity of partaking in.

So tomorrow I will get to go to the court, meet my probation officer (I
suppose, I don't really know) and do more things. I might have more to say
about it tomorrow after I do it, but until then it remains hopeful in my
aspirations.

So, on to the real interesting thing today. Last night, I had an amazing dream.
It was really vivid, I would say probably more vivid than other dreams I have
had. I have spoken it into my phone, but I'm interested again to write this one
into the journal as well. It was interesting, reading the last time I spoke it
along with the speech. I used a lot of the same words, and some of the spoken
word was missing from the written account, and vice versa, but for the most
part, the written version was mostly a script for the spoken one. I think, the
written version took me about an hour to get out, and the spoken one took me
twenty minutes, so it seems as though I have about a three to one speaking to
writting speed.

So I forget precisely where this dream strated. I think, it started, and I was
riding in the car, with my parents and brothers, to the top of a mountain, to
Vail, to go to a resort where we were staying. I don't remember much about this
part of the dream, and I believe if I go back to the spoken version, I will say
the same thing. In the spoken version, and in my memory, I remember there being
something strange about the car. That is, when we got to a certain point on the
mountain, we had to get out of the car, and ride the rest of the way, and the
car had to go a different way than us, as if it were towed, but that doesn't
make any sense, but I suppose it is a dream so it doesn't have to make sense.
In fact, what makes the most sense right now to me is that at a certian point,
we had to get out and ride a ski lift type contraption to our lodge, and the
car did it teleporty thing there. That actually makes the most sense now that I
think about it. It was like, "Okay, at this point, we will get out of the car,
and ride the rest of the way, and the car will just be there when we get
there." I think that is what happened.

Anyway, I don't remember much arriving at the lodge. I do know what the lodge
looks like, and I know it has appeared in dreams past. When you walk in, right
at the front entrance, there is a stairway. Then, to the right is a hallway,
with rooms and such along the right wall, and then, when you get past this
hallway, you are met with a living area sort of thing. I am having very
distinct memories of dreams I have had in the distant past, now that I think
about it, because under the stairs is the kitchen area, and towards the back,
there is a doorway that goes to the back yard. This backyard is a very
expansive backyard, and the house itself is on a hill, so the yard goes down
from the door way. There is something of a swingset there, and off to the right
is a seperate sort of "auxilarry" house, something of a guest house, but no
less fashionable.

Anyway, I don't want to dwell on the layout of the house too much because that
is far from the most interesting part of the dream. Suffice it to say, that
this is a conglomeration of Anne Betencourts old house, the Fuersts house, and
Chuck and Michelle's house. Something of all three of them.

So I don't remember going in to the lodging, but I do remember perhaps
announcing my intention to go to the library. This was the first day of our
vacation, so we were simply getting our things, settling in, and what not, and
I was decidedly bored, and didn't want to spend time with my family there,
playing cards or whatever, and decided to go to the library.

So the next thing I remember is being at the library. This was not the library
like the Richardson Public Library, that library has it's own dream version,
and this library is not that. This library is instead one that is much more
like the grocery store in it's construction. I have been in this library in my
dreams before. In fact, I think this is the same library of the one where I had
the dream of someone being a witch, or perhaps a witch coming after someone,
something like that. So this library has been in my dreams before.

A breif description, the library was big, and open, it has maybe four stories
that I know of, but the first story, it has a big open area, like a sitting
area, with small couches and tables, and beyond this sitting area, you can see
the walls from the outside of the upper floors coming down, and under this part
is where the books and things are shelved.

So I walk through the library, and I go to a book that I find quite on it's
own. It's almost like the book found me, to use the saying that people use when
they say they find something quite meaningful to them. Regardless of this
saying nonsense, I went, and I took the book out of the shelf. What I remember
about it, about the cover of it, was that it was very space like, with stars
and the moon, both of them, almost being a part of the book. I could hold it
and everything, but looking at the cover was almost like looking into the
portal that led to space. Of course, in the dream I did not find this strange
at all, and I did not have a compulsion to "test it out" or anything, but I do
remember thinking, "wow, that is very cool" and examining the cover and
everything, front and back, and feeling like it was very interesting. I was
captivated by it. Now that I think about it as well, in the center of the cover
was a sort of whirlpool, it was a whirlpool of stars, and it kind of popped out
of the cover. I am doing an awful job of exactly explaining it, but it is very
difficult to explain because it is very much a dream device and the words we
use to explain real life things don't really apply to this book cover.

After I examined the cover for a bit, and continued to be fascinated by it, I
openned up the book to it's first pages. The first thing I remember doing was
giving the book a sort of cursory examination. On the first page was an image,
almost like a moving image. But the image wasn't moving in so much as the image
would be it's own image every time you came to it. It was like, the image
itself would change based upon the person that was viewing the image. It was
not wholly different though, if two people were to have described the image,
they would have described similar things, but if one person were to draw the
image they see, it would be a different image than if another person drew it,
and they compared drawings. The drawings would be different, but they would
come from a similar seed. Something like that.

I remember, this first image, there were three FFVI characters on the page
(here we go with FFVI again) I think they were the old man, the daughter, and
one other, maybe Celes. I'm not sure, I don't wholly remember, but they were
certainly sprites. And they were all three in a row, and they were all three
facing down. And they were in a place in FFVI that was like an inn.

Anyway, that was that image, and I remember looking, and the first 16 pages of
the book were right side up, and there were five pictures in these first 16
pages (five again appearing I wholeheartedly believe because that is the floor
of Alliant where I work the fifth floor) Then, at that point, at one of the
images, the image page itself had two sides, one right side up and the other
upside down. And from here all of the pages were upside down. There were 248
pages this way, and eleven of them were picture pages.

So I turned the book upside down, and started reading from the back cover to
the front, so that the pages would be right side up and in order to me. And
what I remember about this section of the book was that it was about a space
man, something like that, and one of the images I remember, the frame of the
picture was the face of a man, and he was compact inside of a space ship, and
so most of the frame was the mans head and face, and the rest was the
windshield of the spaceship, and the control panel, and outside you could see
stars, and in particular you could see a planet, and the planet took up another
aspect of it.

When I woke up, I remember thinking, "what is the symbol of this dream" and I
have it as the spiral, the circle within a circle. That image comes up at least
two times so far, and we will see if it appears again.

Anyway, that was pretty much all I remember about this book. I think it appears
in this form because I have been reading so much mythology lately, and I think
this book surely represents my understanding of mythology.

So at this point, I remember the library was closing, and I was sitting there
on the couch, reading the book, so I went outside to start reading it. In fact,
I think I started reading inside, and by the time I looked up for this next
events, I was outside, how dreams do, and the library was closed when I did
this.

So I remember, I was intruptted by Kyle, and it was the image of Kyle, but he
wasn't there. I think this is my dreams best way of representing getting a call
or a text message from Kyle. And Kyle told me, "Remember, we are having a party
for dad at 5:30 tonight, and you said you would be there." and I looked at him
and I thought, "Yeah, I know I said that, but well, I would rather keep reading
this book, so I will do that instead" Now, I don't remember if this was a
birthday thing, or if it had to do with maybe a year after diagnoses, or
something like that. I think it was a party to celebrate maybe a year of
remission. That seems so very correct, that I think it has to be right. So my
family was celebrating a year of remission in Vail, and I was in the library,
reading this book, and I got a text message from kyle, in the form of his
image, reminding me to return to the lodge to celebrate, but I decided to
ignore it and keep reading.

So I do remember telling Kyle that I was going to keep reading, and that I
might be a little late, but it will be okay. Kyle sort of shruged it off,
knowing that what I was saying wasn't true at all, but he went off at that
point.

So I kept reading, and I remember getting to the point where I was ready to
return the book, but it was at this moment that I realized that the library was
closed.

So now, a bit about the scene where I was. This library was at the area where
Blockbuster used to be, on the dream southeast corner of Plano and Arapaho, and
I was sitting on a couch. The library opened up to the parking lot, just like
IRL. The parking lot itself was empty, except for some light posts, and of
course curbs and such for parking spots.

So as I realized that the library was closed, I decided to put away the book,
and to keep it with me in my backpack. I thought, "eh, no reason why not to
keep it at this point, I'll return it later" because that is what you are
supposed to do with library book, rent them and return them later. So I put it
in my backpack and started going to my car.

This parking lot was very similar to one of the ones at the library in Redmond,
now that I think about it. At least, in the manner of which it is shaped, and
also in the manner of which it is arranged. So I was parked in the far back
left corner from where I was sitting, in the northeast corner (dream) of the
parking lot. And as I started walking to my car, I saw that there were three
vagrant boys playing there. One was on a skateboard, and he was the tallest
one, and was like their leader. There was another on a bike, who was the small
punky one, and there was another on rollerblades, who was silent, and mostly
appeared to be a sort of body guard (very similar roles to the lion king dream,
now that I think about it). But these three boys, I knew that they were up to
no good, or at least, they were not up to good, even if they were up to no
good, and so I elected to walk quickly to my car and make no leisurely moves.

As I go to my car, I go to unlock and and open the door, when the kid on the
skateboard comes up to me and starts talking to me. He starts talking and says
something like, "Hey, that's a nice car, I would like to have it." Something
like that. To which I said, "No, it doesn't work like this, this is my car, and
you can't just come and take it." And he says "oh really," and places himself
between me and the open door. I remember I had my backpack on, and I didn't
know how I would handle this situation with getting in my car quickly with my
backpack, and decided that at that point, if I were to get in my car, I would
just do it with the back pack on my back.

As we were talking, I made a point, we were still just going back and forth
about "I want the car" and "You can't it's mine." and at some point, he stepped
away from between me and the open door, and so, when it was my turn to retort,
instead of retorting, I decided it would be best to get in and get out of there
as quickly as possible. I had thought about fighting him, but I had no idea if
they had any sort of weapon, and on top of that there were three of them, and
they were tough little street vermins, so I decided fighting them was not wise
(and also, fighting seemed antithical to the whole point of my argument, that
the car was mine and that I didn't need to fight for it), so like I said, I
decided that the best course of action was getting the fuck out of there as
quickly as I could.

So at that point, I just hopped in the car with backpack on and everything, and
closed the door as quickly as I could. The boy saw my move, but I was able to
get the door shut before he could do anything to stop me. I then started the
car as quickly as I could, and drove straight. Now, at this point, my car was
parked facing the curb, so I decided instead of backing out, and adjusting, and
going to the proper exit spot, I would just go straight over the curb, and the
grass, and the other curb. I did so, and the ride was bumpy in doing so, but it
wasn't too bad. I then took a right on to plano road (going dream east) and
started going, but only about 100m there was a road block, and the road took a
very steep and marked "undrivable" at this point, and I knew that going through
the roadblock was absolutely not an option.

So at this point, I took a sharp U turn, making sure to do so in a way to get
through the whole U turn in one go, without backing up and taking a 3 point
turn, and when I went to facing the other way, the kid on the bicycle was
facing me. I started going, and I was in the middle of the road, and he started
riding to me, for a head on collision. I changed to the other lane to try and
avoid him, but he turned also to meet me. I knew what he was doing, he was
trying to run himself in to me, but I decided that the quickest way out of
there was to let that happen and to go on my way.

So when we collided, he went over the hood of my car, and came out on the other
side. As soon as that happened he goes, "What the fuck man, that's fucked up,
you just ran over me, you owe me now, we got that all on video, you're fucked
now." And I had a moment of panic. I knew he was trying to run in to me for the
purpose of insurance fraud, but I didn't think that of course his friends would
be filming the whole thing. Still though, I took a right, (now going dream
north) onto a road that led to the mountianous roads, and started going along
that way, because that was the way I needed to go.

I remember being a bit paniced on the road, thinking "fuck, I didn't think
there would be cell phone cameras, these little fuckers will make a case
against me now and I'll have to fight it, and I don't know if I have sufficient
evidence."

As I was thinking all of this, there was a man, a somewhat old man, maybe in
his sixties, and he was on the road. He was laying on teh road, and his car was
further up on the road, also blocking the road somewhat, but not so much that I
couldn't get past. As I approached the man, I thought, "is he dead" and I
didn't know. I didn't know at all. I decided to ignore him, and as I went
around him, something about the way I went around him cause him to fall. (The
road was such that the mountain was to the left, and it fell steeply to the
right, and he was on teh right side of the road, and I went around to the left.
The road was also very curvy at this point) So as I went around him, and he
fell off the cliff to the right, I looked back, and I thought, "Well, I don't
know if he was dead, but he certainly is now." And I thought about that as
well. I thought how awful it would be if he wasn't dead, and he was merely
unconscious, and my actions pushed him off the edge to his death.

However, I was not horrified so much at that thought, more than I was at the
thought that I would be labeled a murderer if such a thing were true. But then
I thought, "But there are no cameras up here in the mountains, there is no way
for anyone to know what happened" and at that thought, then my next thought
was, "There are camera's in that parking lot, if those kids make a case against
me, I can request the footage of that parking lot and show the harrassment that
they gave me, I'm safe on both counts." Still, as I kept driving, even in the
dream, I found the juxtoposition of those two scenes so startling, and almost
nauseating. On the one hand, I was saved from murder conviction because there
were no camera's, and on the other hand, if any case was made against me, I
would be able to use the camera's to implicate the boys. I don't have words to
describe how this made me feel (or even, how it makes me feel right now, this
juxtoposition is the most impactful and interesting part of the dream to me).

I did not dwell on it in the dream, though, I kept driving. And as I kept
driving, I made it up to a visitor center for the resort, to the point where
you have to leave your car and take the ski lifts to your resort, wherever that
resort may be. So I park my car, and go in to this resort.

I want to describe a bit the scene. The parking lot is a small lot, and it is
surrounded on all sides, except the entrance, by mountains. The visitor center,
it is made of wood, and is placed on a foundation of stone, and the front door
is a few steps up to it. It is what you would imagine a very nice visitor
center is.

As I walked in, I looked around. To the left from the entrance is an open area.
There are bear pelts and deers heads and the sorts of things you would expect
to see in a well constructed and nice visitor center. THere were glass tables
and nice chairs made out of wooden branches and well kept cushions. But I did
not go to this area. Further right from there, on the opposite wall, was the
entrance to the stairway, and that direction is where you would go up to the
ski lifts, and get on the lift to the lodge. And further right there was a sort
of wide entryway, I forget what sort of doors it was, but there were certainly
doors, and they had the little window that you could see through. So I looked
through the window, and saw that the other side had some really wide stairs
going up.

I decided to go through these doors and see what was going on over here.

When I went up the wide stairs, there was a reception area. I could tell upon
walking in, and talking the receptionist, that this was a software firm, and
that they were conducting interviews there. At the top of the stairs, to the
right, was a window, which looked out to a drop, indicating that this area was
raised rather high on the foundation, but the view was of the side of the
mountain. What I'm getting at is the view wasn't ground into the mountain, but
it was just teh side of teh mountain, and this area was raised off the ground.

Next to this window, straight ahead along the right wall, was the reception
desk. Then, to the left from there, there were multiple doorways, and a seating
area, where there were maybe two guys and a girl, all waiting to be
interviewed.

The receptionist asked me if I was there to be interviewed, and I said that I
didn't have an appointment, and she said that that didn't matter, and I could
join in as a hop on. So I said, sure, I could do that, and I went to sit next
to the girl.

I remember talking with her a little bit, and we talked a little bit about the
firm and such. She mostly just told me what had gone on, that there had been a
few different interviewees that have come and gone, and that she had been
waiting there for some time, and I got this sort of impression from her that
she was open to talking with me, but didn't want to be too open because we were
rivals for the position. I didn't aske about the position or anything, but I
knew it was a software position, and was content with that.

So at this point, I waited there for a bit, but I reason two things, first that
this would take some time to do, and it was in the way of where I had intended
to go in the first place, and second, that I was unlikely to get the position
for the reason that one I was a "hop on" and I had no appointment where these
other people did, and also just at the sheer fact that there was one position
and maybe a half dozen or so people interviewing, so I had a lot of
competition, and the odds of landing this one were slim. Plus, I told myself, I
don't need the position, so there was no reason to bother myself here.

So at around that point I left the office. I went back down the stairs and out
through the doors, and as I was about to turn to the stairs that would lead to
the lift, I saw the image of dad, similar to the image of Kyle earlier, and he
said, "Where were you, we were expecting you all night, and Kyle said you were
coming, but you never showed up" and at that point, I didn't reply to my father
at all, but I just thought, "I must have spent more time than I thought."

It was around this point that I woke up.

Amazing amazing dream.

When I woke up the first time, I remembered thinking, "I need to get this one
out as soon as possible." and I began exploring it in my mind and in my head to
remember teh key points, it was like, Vacation, Library, Book, Vagrants, Cliff,
then interview. I walked through all of the scenes in my head, in the middle of
the night, but as I was doing so, before I got up to get my phone to speak it
out, I went back to sleep. When I woke up again an hour later, I got my phone
this time, and spoke out as much as I could remember. I do seem to recall that
I had another dream, but I think this was the "forgetful" dream that I have
sometimes. The dream whose purpose is for my mind to forget the dream that I
wanted to remember. I'm not sure why this dream happens, but I think I had one.
I don't remember at all what it was like, this forgetful dream, but I am very
glad I remembered the first dream. So I spoke out the dream, and went back to
sleep. At that point, I woke up, and cat napped until about eight, when I
decided to stop being a piece of shit and actually get to work.

Work has been okay, but I do want to say that right now it is five PM on the
dot, and I haven't gotten the opportunity to have much rest. I have been
helping Caitlin with a bundle set issue, and then I had to go all the way to
fuckin Denton, pee in a cup, and drive all the way back. I have been writing
pretty much ever since then.

I also want to say, I feel bad for the messages I have sent back and forth with
Liel. She wanted to meet today, but I mostly just don't and I sort of mostly
lied to her about it. I feel bad, but at the same time, I really don't want to
meet today. Or at least, I am wholly not prepared to meet, and I want to spend
my time doing other things, like preparing for when we meet. She then messaged
me that she is going out of town tonight, so it makes sense that she would want
to meet on such short notice, but I stick by my decision. I just feel bad about
it.

Maybe I'll dream about it tomorrow, who knows. I am amazed at how intricate my
dreams have become. They are wonderful writing material, and the ability to
have a dream, and describe the scene is so nice. I love having this sort of
material to write about.
