# 20181105 So I just want to take this time to talk about how much of a piece
of garbage I can be some times.

Last weekend, I staying in my room the entire time. I checked my phone maybe
four times to make sure that no one was interested in me for any reason, and
besides that I rummaged through about a dozen different video games, not really
landing on one that I wanted to play at all, and cycling through the various
games wondering why they weren't satiating me. I didn't feel like playing
games, and I didn't feel like going out and doing things, so instead of either
of those things I scraped random youtube videos and masterbated around four or
five times throughout the weekend. Towards the end of the weekend, I ate some
beef, but I still felt hungry, and I didn't want more beef, so I went to the
grocery store, bought some donuts, and ate those with some milk. I did not work
out a single time, and that was the only time I actually went outside my
apartment. I had not other human contact besides what you would consider my
contact with others through twitch and youtube, which is wholly oneway and
non-recipricol.

So the question then is, if you're so disgusted with yourself, why don't you
change it, and the thing is, I don't really know. The answer I think is that
the critical mass for something to change hasn't been reached yet in a way. Or
rather, it's not the critical mass, but the incentives to change. I feel like I
have lost my ability to connect with others. I am disgusted with myself, and
that has become something of my identity, and with that as your identity, it
becomes difficult to connect with others over something like that. Not only do
they not care, but I also don't want them to care. It doesn't make for good
conversation.

In fact, it doesn't make for good journal entries either. I'm not sure why I am
writing this to be totally honest. I know that this sort of thing is
self-indulgent, and I really don't want to do that. It becomes a lot better
when I'm at work, which I am now. At least when I'm here, I have some
motivation to be a better person.

Something also, I think, to recognize, is that I have experimented with this
new diet, with both intermittent fasting and carnivore, and perhaps it has gone
on too long. Literally all I have been eating has been beef, almond butter and
strawberry preserves with milk, nuts during work, and now, in the past couple
of weeks, donuts. I should surely find something that seems reasonable to eat.

I also need to really clean my apartment. It's becoming ridiculous.

--

So this is something of an idea i had. I want to try and write out my free form
thoughts just as they come without filtering or altering or just letting my
thoughts appear as they appear, and from there I don't know where this is going
to go but it's the thing that I want to try, because I am able to just write
for as much as I want, and keep writing, and it's all nonsense, and non of it
makes any sense anyway so why bother trying to articulate shit if it's just
coming out like this is going to sound ridiculous. And I awnt to keep doing
this for as much as possible for 20 minutes and fro how ever long that happens,
I hm going to have th emonitor off, with my eyes closed, and I just talk and
talk like this, without regard for anything. Then at the end of twenty minutes,
I am going to stop, and meditate for ten munitues, then I am going to come back
to this, and continue to write and write, and just keep writing where ver my
thoughts take themselves, and just do that for as long as it seems appropiate.

So here we are, this is my life now.

Something I have thought about is' I want to talk to some of the characters of
my psyche. Thi thing is, I'm not sure the best way to invoke them. There are
times that I get into a place where I think that I have invoked a certian way
of thought, but then the dominatnt way of thought intervenes and says no there
are more degerees and forms of theis than you think. So I'll have one nperson
in my psyche who has a strong view on something, but then, I will say, surely
there isn't somenoe who has skch an extreme view on things like that, it's just
wrong, it can't be tright for one person to be like that.

I have this problem wihtn I try and create characters for a novel or book or
whatever. I will write something, and the character will have a certain
personality, and I waill say no, somenoe dosen't think like that, it's wrong.
But it's not about wrong or right. It's about how people are. But aI think that
people are aor can be like this sometimes, and when they are ai don't
unterstand them. They are strange to me, when they are like this. o I want to
try and get to this point where I am talking to these parts of my spyche.

How do I invoke this thought?+ Perhaps it would be best to try and talk about a
certain isse. So right now, the mederator of this debate will present the topic
at hand. The moderateor's name is Brett, he is the one that has supreme rule
over the things that happen between my individuals. He is the overarching glue
that cannects them all. As the moderator of this debate, I will now introduce a
concept which we have been exposesd to recenetly in the listening of Sam
Harris,. He has talkded a bit extensively about the topic of fgree will. Now, I
nkow most of you hav e osme opinoion or another about free will, but , and I
would like to aske you all about it. Now, it's difficult to begin, because I
know what the moderator looks like, but I know what anrgy rett lookss like,
Right now I have the image in my had of a monster, something of a beast. EHe is
the alpha bear moster, I have drawn him. I want to have your initial take on
the topic of free will.

Fuck you man, fuck you and your questions. This isno't a topic of disscussion,
this is just a fucked up way to get us all together and talk about something.
You are tho worst, you know that, you are an absolutely vile sort of thing, so
fuck you and fuck your questiuon.

Okay, Iam going to have to intervene here, I achknowledge your point, and would
like to move on. Someone get a cage for this asshole, put him in a chain or
osmething because he clearly isn't going to provied anything uselful to this
discussion.

Okay, so next, we will hav eth eintellectulal come and talk, he is a man in a
white sicence lab coat, mestly just because that's what entellectualls wear,
and he waers it because he want's to be considered an intellectual, and so he
wears the coat in hopes that the cheicken will come before the egg. So, mr
intellectual, tell me what you have to say about the topic of free will.

Indeed, it is a rather profuound topic on which there is much to say. This is
smothenig that I have thought of immensely, and , well, what's this.  I seem to
be interrupted by the atherlete. He seems to want to have his turn before me.

Yeeah, man, you're being , I think it's all about hanessing the inner mind to
hone it to what you want it to do. What's all this nonsense about free will? I
would much rather talk about how to hone th e will, and to have the willpower
to do the things that I have been able to do. I have been able to sky people, I
have rocked some serious workouts, in general, I have harnessed myself to do
some amazing shit, and like I tell you, man, it's got to be in the moment man,
it's all got to be in there, like that, doing what you do, and whithout that,
you are just making sthit up. Like, man, why would you say ther is no will if I
can use the will to make me do all the stuff that you won't do? Maybe it's just
the fact that you can't do what I do that makes you want to think that there is
no such thin g as the will, man, and I tell you, there is something quite
telling in thefact that you think there is no such thing, when I am here just
rocking the world with all of the things that I am able to do wihth what I have
in my will. So there. I just gots to say that man.

All right, this is mederator, would anyone like to retort.

Well yeah, surely someone would like to retert, atherelete here again, and they
might say something but, i feel ilke I have qued'd the shit out of everyone
whith my argument. Do, don't tell, is what I say.

Okay, look here man, shaman brett here. I have done mushrooms, and while I most
certainly respect the things you have been able to accomplaish, surely you
agree that the belief in something doesn't make the thing true, even if that
belief idarws great benefit for you? Perhaps, in a way, you are creating the
free will in oredr to do the things that you do, and in so doing, you are
invoking something in your psyche that leads to a greater sense of self. You
are yourself, and your self is nothing more than what the self would creeate. I
wish I could convey this to you in a way that made sense, but life is something
that is amazing to bohold, and when you behold it, there is something beautiful
there. You always go deeply into the bttom of existance, and you say something
there, and when you do, you always get something, but you never trancende that
existance. It's in the trancendence that you are able to rise above and become
something greater.

Okay, disciplened brett here, I am rather week, so I apologize greatly for
jumping in on this conversation. You are all su much bigger than I am, and
really, my opinion doesn't matter here. But something I want to say, and I'm
afraid to say it because you all oare suc much bigger than I am, is that, well,
I do'n even have something really worthwhile to say, so I'm sorry fo r even
speaking out.

Mederator here, Surely you can say something that is worthwhile. Even though
you are small, sometthing you want to say must have some value. You are ar part
of use, afterall

--

So we are  back and we have come back to this point. When we left,someone was
going to say something about something , but that doesn't matter anymore. Now,
what we would like to say is this.

Every good tdebate, ro conversation, will have two main participants,. These
two participants will be opposed on some point,s and they will go back and
forth on talking about them as they go, and when they get to semtihng, they
will make their point. These ttwo participants will perhaps have some respcect
not for th eopninion of the other, but instead, everyone will divulge that
every participant has the right to express their opinion. In doing so, we would
like to sort how who has what idea, and what they would like to express with
the group.

There can be up to six people in observation the entire time. Some might be
observing, but they will not say anything. The observers may interject, but ,
and if a concession is allowed by the main two points being argued, then they
will be allowed to expand on their points. However, if the main person speaking
their turn has something they would wish to say, and then an observer
interjects, the main speaking may choose to squachesh that objectino, and
continue his point.

Also, the main opponents to the point being made cannot interject. However, he
may be so alligned with someone lese that theat someone elese can interject on
his behlaf, but but that interjectwill be his own, and not the opponents.

So wihtout further ado, lets place two individuals here in the cnetr to conture
our discussion on the debate of freew will.

On the one side, we have our spirtualist, and religous advocate for th escene.
Opposite him we have our athiest and stanch critic. It only seems appropiate
that the two with the strongest oppionions on the subject will get placed in
the middel.

So befere we begin, we must make note that the athiest is much larger in size
thatn the Chirstian. However, I believe the Chirstain may have some interesting
points.

The intercjrections will come as they come, and we will not take the time to
annocunce who is watching.

However, we do tknow that the athelet, the montster, and the small puny
pragmatisztt is here. So wiThey have made their voices heard in our previous
session.

So without further ado, lets begin. Athiest, you may take the floor.

Thank you. So the topic of free will is one that is most interesting, bceause
it's the most prevalent idea about the profliariotn of evil in the world. It is
told mby many, including the one across from me, perhaps, if I put the words in
his mouth that he might so wish to say, that God gave us free will for the sake
of allowing us to commit evil. Oh, there is os much wrong here, that I don't
even know where to begin. So let's begin with what is real. The god that gave
us free will does not exsit jusct as umch as the free wil that the god
supposedley gave us. Niether of them exidst, and that's all there really is to
it. Everything is determined by the workings of the laws of nature. THere are
laws af nature that guide th emovements of the porticles and the atoms, and
there is something that goes through all of these things that determines the
laws and mathematices that hapens here. So we whave thes esorts of notions of
time and space and such, and the noiton of p,ortitacles, and everything that
happens is the restult of all of these particilse going abuot in the way thta
th the laws of natuer say that the y should, Give me the initial staet of the
univeres, and I can give you thet everything that has happened som afyre in the
workings. I could calcutelate everything with a a comuptier strang enough. So
there is no free will, there is only the laws of natuer.

Moderetare: interesting ponit,. At this point, I will raise the floor to any
who might have objectisens. No objcetiosn,s so gret, now twhe christian will
have the floor.

Yes, well, thanki you. I must say, it is quite appalinig to me that anyone
would deny the concept that they have a self. To think taht we are nothing more
than robots is silliness. Robotts need creators, so who are we to think that
we, if we are robats, ar esomehow robots that have no creator? Indeed, perhaps
the ideas tht you have no free will is becoause you deny the very exkistance of
all that seems self evident. I humble myself before the creator, he is my
everything, and my all. I think, he is worth listening to, and when I try to
listen to him, I hear a faint voice that tells me that I have something tho
choose. I have the path of the great, or haI have tho path of despair. It is up
to me whaot path I may choose. And because I am given that cohionce, I must
take that choigce, and make it. I am not told where that ptah is. That path wis
not layed out to me, I much make the path my own, I must bear  myself and bear
all of the sins taht I have been born with, and I must take them all up, and I
umst choose to walk the path when I could just as easily throuw it in the
river. Walking over the bridge is not easy, and we are all given the choingce
to ignoret the bride. But that is not how these things work. We must be heald
resoponisbel for the things that we choose, and to pretend that ew are not
repsonsible for them, that we deid not some how choose to stray from the path
of th emighty and virutous way, then there must be something else that we ar
elooking to. But to lok to nothing, that is cannot be the right way to the way
of the wordl. 

Modereater: Interesting, another interesting ponit.. I will throuw it back to
the athiest, becaus ehe is eager to retort, it seems.

Yes, I am. To think that there is something like a god, or that god must have
created me, is sill. Why would there have to be something like us that created
everything.? Why can it not have just come out of nothing? And well, nothing
comes out of nothing, but there your god comes out of nothing. So this is a
sill argument. But I am lonsing myself. I want to get back to where I wanted to
go.

Atheslet: Yeah, well, if there is no such thing as feree will, how come I am
able to use it to mdo all of the things that I am able to do? With my will, I
am able to perform and to work workrs of great magic, and you would say that
there is no such thing as free will. I don't know about god, but why do you
turn to will.?

Look,  I'm not here to say that free will is sotmteing that is bad, I'm ontly
concerned with what is, and whatever point you are willing to make about the
utility of free will, you ar emust make that there is no such thing about free
will when it comes to the real actual world that we live itn. The same as the
soul? Can you measure the soul? Can you measuer the will? Of course not. These
things are merely constructs that we have made because they are useful for us.
I asy, let them be useful. But I am not cencerned with the usefluness of
something when I am attempting to determine whether or not that thing is real.
It is an interesting idea, but nothing more.  So if it helps you do what you
do, thatn more power to you, but pelase don't come and tell me that this is the
only evidence you have for it? Indeed, just because it is helpful doesn't make
it real.

Moderator. Interesting.

Shaman, Interesting that you say that. 

--

Okay, so we hanve had something of a break, and it seems like many people wish
to make objectiosns to what has been said so far. I will let the athelete go
first, since he has made the hsortest point.

Yeah, thanks. I've more or less alerady made my point, but I just want to say
that, whatever you tow got going, the concept of a free will is good for me to
use to do amazing shit. So you two work yout your own shit, I' got my shit
ffugured out. That's all. 

Cool, thank you for that mr atherelet. Now, I think tho shaman was going to
make a poirt.

Yeas. than you. So my role of shamen is to align people in a way that makes the
most sonse. And of rcourse, you and everyone knows that IaI am the most open of
everyone here, and I am always open to the kinds of ideas that anyone will
present to me. So I know that I am not going to do anything to change either
one of your minds on this issue. But I do want to say one thing to the
atheiest. I think, it's important for you to recorgvize, that for the health of
everyone invelved, it is not wise to tear down everything anyone else has to
say on the basis that it's not true. now, as absuld as that may be, I think you
have to adimt that there is somtehnig to be gained by believeing in a free
will. and that a purely rational appreach to this whole thing isn't wy we have
gotten to whenre we have a s a specias today. In fact, it's the belief in the
will that has brought about so many different religions, and those religooins
are the most prominont ways of theought in our lives and in our universe
today,. Now, does that indicate anything abotu th e realness of the fere will?
No, of course not. But I am appearling to your notion here, by saynign that it
might be useful ta talk about such a thing in certain contexts.

Okay, I would like to make an objection to that as well. I do want to say,
shaman, I do greatly relpect that posiontos, and I wil lconcede that I have bee
a bit of dick in my way of handling this woule thing. But I strongly belief
that the holding on to something such a a falste notion of what feree will
means cannot be healthy in the long run. It would be like holding on teh the
notion that the way things fall to the ground is goverened by the great falling
god of the roman pantheion. Now, you could say that such a belief in the
falling god is  agood way t o come to terms with  something likea  fear of
heights or it could explain the notion that things are afraid of falling, but
in th elong roun, we would never have discovered gravity it it werens for the
oppositon to the idea of the falling god. So as useful as the belif in the
falling god may be, it's mimportant to recqogvize that is not the belief in the
falling god that I have an objcetion to, but rather, it's teh notion that the
falling god is the reall thing, and that the falling god is something taht
should be worshiped. THta is where I drow tha linve.

The christian would like to objcet.

Indeed, I am small, and you have squashed me in your thoughts in the past, but
I do want to say something. In fact, it will be hard for me to get out my
thoguhts, because I hav not been so developed as to get them out. All I know is
that at this point, I feel there is something deeplyp wrong with what we have
said. I believ in my god. I really do. so that me uch we know. And I also feel
that you might be better off had you some semblance of belief in some god
yourslfe. In fact, I feel taht you are filling that void inside of you wilth
these notion of the real phiysical world, or gravity, and these notions of
realtity. They in a way fill in that gap that I fill in with ogd. But with that
difference, I do'n t see how you can say it is a choice that or not a choice
that you don't belibeleve in my god. You choose not beliefe in what I beliefe.
I beleieve that is a choice. ANd don't you see that with that, you alre filling
in some hole with whit  you think it should be filled with, rather than letting
it be filled by what you want to thinsk is something real?

How blabbering you are, I'm sorry , but I must hold firm on this point. I
really despise whene you all say that there is smotehnig like god that must be
filled in with the thing as god. So perhaps I am filling in the hole that you
fill with god as with something les. SWhat does that get you. You say, "OOh,
you are filling in the void that I fill with god with science. To that I say,
Sure, why not. Science seems to give us much more thatn the belife in some
extra being from a nother planet will get us. It's not worthwhile to think that
gravitiy is caused by the falling god, to use that example again. You cauld say
that you fuill in the void with the noiton of a falling god. and I fill it in
with the notion that maybe would could reun experiments and trynad understand
gravity. Well, what then? I have still discovered gravity in my case, and you
have discovered nothing exctept the myths of an imaginary man. So In that way,
sur,e, I might be filling in something with the purusit of science, but to
think you are better than me because you fill it in wiwh god is just plain
stupid. Fuck you.

Okay, moderater here, things are getting heated, I can tell. In fact, the whole
environment of this room just got a littel hotter. Can we agree to cool down a
little bit?

Atheiest., Yeah, I apoloigze, this is just something I feel really strongly
about. I hat e when I am peached down to by someon who whould presume that they
are better than me, and would then tell me exactly in what weay they think
thaty are better than me , and then tell me that I am just like thenm, but in a
worse way then them, because the god I worlshuip is somehow inferior to their
god. You made up a god, and then you dare to talk to me to tell me that my god
is is worlse than yourse. Let me have my god, if you must use thoes terms,
because fuck you and fuck your god. He fucking sucks you homophibic peice of
shit.

Moderator, Okay, I see the tempers are still high. Have you made your point.?

Yeah, I think I have, I dfo  really need to calm down. In fact, mr christian,
tell me, what is it that you have to say?

Moderateor. Okay, I must remind you that you don't have to directly give in to
this temper. THings are getting very heated, so if you need some time ti to
cool down, that is totally cool.

Chritsatin, Yes, thank you. I do think I would like to talk a bit, but I am not
sure what I havt to say. Indeed, I am much smaller than you, but something I do
want to addreesss is, I do not presum e to be better than you. IIt is simply my
weakness that what I say would come off as such. I wish to be thought of as
humble, and the fa9cct that you think I am not is a refrenec to my ouwn
shortcomings. So for that I do greatly apoligize. And I must go on to say, I do
not wish to tell you that my way of thinking about things is better or worse
than what you may think, I make no supposition to what you may or may not have
done or accomplished with thyour thougts and actions, and I don't want to think
that I am better than tyou in any way. So again, fror that , I am sorry as
well. But I do think, and this is somtehing that just feels right to me, that
therer is something about humans that that requicres us to fill something with
something. I have chosen t o fill myself with god, and to find and transform
everything about howwho i am with the power of what the bible would call the
holy spicirt, but I am far from grasping or undertsantding anything about it,
and I must say that I am greatly in the debt of all those before me that owuld
attempt t oundestrand what they have seen.

hhSo this is the last bit that I want ot say. As moderator, I have to giv ethe
last word to the christian, or at least, I have to give the first word here to
the christian, because he was intrurupted by the bell last time. So ifg you
would contione with what you were trynig to say, we would all like to hear what
wyou have to say againg.  Indeed, thank you.

So I havI would like t o emphasivezze that I am very quite unlike the person
that the atheiest would have you believe that I am. I am loly, humble, and
insufficionet t o talk about theings like this, but I know that I am filled
with ethe didea of god. He completes me, as and I think that there is something
in all of us that needs to feel completed. I choose to fill that with ogd, and
others may choose to fill tah twith others. I call it my god slot, so I
apoligize if you thought that I was saying that the fact that everyone has a
god slot as I call it meant that you must have a god.  I did not mean that. But
what I di o want to say is, everything taht I do, and everything that I say, it
comes from goed. I mean it in that, I feill mys god slot with what I feel to be
the spirit of god, and through that I am able to cat and live in the way that I
feel is the most godly that I hcan above myself. Now, sometimes, when I try and
let god in, I instead let in some of what I like to call the devil, or the
serpent. He can wriele his way in, and he camn make miselfe part of who i am ,
and I don't like that, but he can incfecte and contcaminate everything about my
being. But my god slot I choose to remain. It takse wisdom to let only god in.
So it is my lack of understanding about god taht alows mysef to become
contaminated with the divel. But the word of the lord is pruer, it is the
greatest thing taht ever exitss, and the greatest thing that every will exist,
and he created us, and throught our creatingon, we wish to maginify his glory.
He gave us the choince to live that way, so that we may choose to glorify him,
and in so doing, we become filled with the siprit, and live thte life as
greatly as we can., through his wisdom and through his powrer.

Moderatero. THat sounds great. Now, that I see you have coold ed down a bit,
would you like to retrot, athiest?

Indeed, well, I have gcooled down, so I would like to just reitterate my ponit.
I do now really concertn myself with the utility of a belif. Thtat is great,
thta you have a god slot. What you cacll the god slot, I call <Being a human
being" so if you fund that you have to call it the god solt so that god myay
fith there, that's your peragative, not mine. So I submit to you that there is
something like a "godsolt, but to call it such a thing is just well, to me it's
leading to something that dosen't make sense. It's putting the apple before the
tree, . But you are right, I do have what I believe you would seay is something
like a god slot, and that is filled with my leve of konweldeg. And knoweldege
about the world does not presuppose anything about what goes on in the world. I
see the world, and I see, "my god solt is an empty vessel to be filled with
what the world may have to offer, and whatever the world havs to offer, that
maoy go into my gold solt.

You might call me a god slut then, in that I let anything in the world enter.
But that is far from the truth. I am very discerening about what enetrse,
something amy enter, and I say, the scientific methedod determines whecether or
nato thet athing should stay in the god slot or not. If it passes the
sicnetifict methedod, it may stay,. Or rather, nothing ever truely passesd the
scinetific method, that's not possible, but if ant any ponit something fails
the scientifict method, tait will be rejected, and hperhaps later it mygiht
hasve realon for it come back and be retested agaidng. It might enter the slet
again, but everything tat enters the slot must be testied througoughly. It must
be rejectided. So yes.

And I amy arge, you are nto,, to let the will of the lord fill your god slot,
that is something of, well, it's wishful thinking. You must believe that you
are someohow not part of this world, to think thatere is something like god
that gocon fill this slot. It's really such a crazey notino. But I digreess.
there. I believe we have hit our impasse. I have made my point as best I can
about free will. It's an isllusion, and one that you are allowed to
dissillusion yourself with if you want, but it's an illusion noe the less.


Well, In that point, I must say that I do feel as thought you do not trely
believe that, this is the crhirastian by the way, but I think that you are
merely saying that to stick by your dogmatic belief in the material world. You
feel so lstrongly about the fact that there is no such thing as a trancentedent
experience that you throw atway antyhnig thtat could approcah the trancendent
as unscienctific.

No, I must object here, on behalf of my friend the athiest, I must say that the
spiritual is idndeed something to behaold. No one will deny the trancestendetnt
or teh psychodelic experience, but to claim that such an experience is simply
the doing of some supreme creator is just as dissillusions as to thingk that
such experiences don't exstst, obviously thy do exsti, and obviously we have no
idea where they come from.

Yes, that is true, but I feel that the trancentdent is so misunderstood that to
attributie tit to god is no mor e foolish than to think that  it's not god at
all.

Yeah, I think so.

Moderateror.

So here is what I have been able to gather here.

Thethe athiest believes that free will does not exist, because there is no
material basis for it.

The chirstian believes in free will because he believes that it is given to us
by god so that we may choose to fill ourseveles with him so that we may become
something greater than our lowley selves.

Then there are others like the athelete, who does not believe in free will one
way or the other, but instead utilizes it for the benefit of what he would like
to accomplish.

And then the shaman, who would say that the concept of the free will is open,
and that we can never be really know if something like the free twill actually
exists or not.

The brute, the puny, and the others, did not chime in.

I would like to spend a bit here going through outr characetrs again.

We have ment the brute, the tiny, the shaman, the atherlete, the athiest, and
teh chirstian.. Another hat we have not met is the mathemetician.

Also, we have not really met the shadow. He has been greatly repressed in the
latest years, and I would like to bring him out into light at some point. He is
friends with the brute, but he is someone else.

So we have met 8 people here for this discussion. 

I feel that this has been enstructive. It has greatly enhanced our stance on
the free will of the psyche, and shows some arguments presented by various
sides of the arugemnt. How instructive this has been. This format of doing this
is nice as well.

While the timer has not finished yet, there is not much more to say here, and I
think it would be best to end it.

And just as I type that, the time goes of. How wodnderfully coincident that
was.

So long.
