So I would like to write out my opening statement to a therapist. I think it
would be beneficial to do so, because I am considering therapy, but I want to
determine if my therapist is bullshiting me or not.

So my name is Brett, and mostly, I want to work through some things with you. I
don't have anything specific that I want to address, like anxiety or
depression, although I do experience those things to some extent, but more, I
feel as though I have been aimless in my life, and I don't know where I want to
aim. I have also been having lots of dreams lately that indicate to me that the
current path I am on is not quite right, but I'm not sure what I need to
change, or what the right path looks like, and I feel paralyzed to change out
of fear of losing what little I have gained in my life.

So some background. I went to public school through second grade, then after
that I was homeschooled all the way through high school. I did gymnastics from
when I was four to when I was eleven, and after I quit I didn't do anything
active until I found ultimate when I was around 16 or so. I got my bachelors
degree in college, and found Crossfit while I was there, while I also captained
the Ultimate team.

For a multitude of reason which we could get in to, I grew ever more bitter at
the world. My parents are what I consider the worst kinds of Christian, and the
realization that Christianity wasn't real in the way I thought it was coupled
with the fact that school was something of a joke to me, in combination with
lack of success on the Ultimate field, all accellerated by my discovery of
Marijuana at that time, led to a rather large existential crisis, and I grew
rather nihilistic towards the end of my college days. I went on to get the
degree anyway, but I absolutely loathed pretty much everything about my
existance at that time, and wanted to do something where I felt like I could at
least make my own decisions.

So after I graduated, I decided I would take a minimal number of possessions,
pack up my car, and drive to Seattle, and live in my car there. I'm sure you
could unpack the psychological motivation for taking such a journey if I went
in to it, but there was a whole host of reasons I wanted to take this
experience.

It just so happened that Ultimate nationals was going to be hosted in Dallas
that Fall, so I stayed in Seattle for that Summer, and then came back to Dallas
in the Fall to watch Nationals. When I got back, I visited my parents a few
times, and one of the times I was about to leave to go back to my car and find
a parking lot to sleep in, my dad said, "Why don't you just stay" and so I
stayed for the next three or so years.

During that time, I did nothing but play video games, and I got addicted to an
MMO, FFXIV, which I have since stopped playing. I put about 5000 total hours in
that game across 2 years, and actually hit the very low MMO ceiling that that
game has. After I hit the ceiling, it felt awful, I felt useless, and hopeless.
In addition, I also happened to meet a girl through the game. That relationship
is a whole mess that could also be unpacked, but regardless, my experience
there led me to want to attempt to bring my life back together.

My dad's friend had a coffee roasting business, and he need help to run the
place, so I got in contact with him, and I got a job as a coffee roaster. From
there, I started my job search looking for positions in my CS field.
Eventually, I got hired at Alliant, where I work now, and have been working
there for a year and a half now.

A year ago now, my dad was diagnosed with Luekemia. That has produced strange
feelings in my. In the past I felt simply resentful to both my parents, but my
dad in particular, and now, not only do I still have that resentment, which I
try and let go of but it's still there regardless, but I also have guilt about
having resentment towards a man who is struggling with a terrible variety of
cancer, and has been continually battling it with my mother for the past year.

In April, about eight months ago, I took a vacation in Colorado. While I was
there, I decided to take a calculated risk, buy an ounce and a half of
marijuana, and travel back here with it. I started smoking it again around
October, (just before my dad was diganosed), but on my way back, I was pulled
over with one of my back tag lights out, and got arrested.

That about catches you up to speed on the very short version of how my life has
gone so far. Right now, I feel as though I need to take another step towards
something, but I don't know which direction that step is, and I feel aimless.
