# 20180712 Time Management - Visit of my father, who talks of Bowties
Okay, so I think I have decided on a system that will optimize my time spent
doing these things while at the same time ensuring that I get work done. That
system will be to have certain set times where I only allow myself to do things
related to work, and certain set times where I only allow myself to do things
such as this. When I break it down, what makes the most sense to me is
something like this.

1 hour for writing
1 hour for Russian
1 hour for Reading
1 hour for other things (I could back up this hour with my writitng time as
that is the one that will most often spill. Either that, or make the writing
time not a strict hour, and have the other ones, like reading and other, be
more strict.)
4 hours for work.

The reason I feel the need for this sort of system is because, while I do still
feel guilty about doing this at all during work hours, yesterday I ran in to a
sort of conundrum that gave me pause for this whole thing. Yesterday, I spent a
lot of time working on my vimscript to mark the headers for my lit md files,
and I was making some good progress on it, and as I was working on it, it got
to be 3:30 and I still hadn't really done any actual work. And a thought came
into my head that was the most strange of thoughts. I remember thinking, "so I
should work more on this now, because if I don't then I will want to work more
on it tomorrow, but tomorrow I want to be doing actual work, so I should work
more on this now so that I have more time tomorrow to do my actual work."

Now, obviously, this I feel has only one valid psychological interpretation,
and that is that I simply wanted to come up with any excuse to keep working on
this thing and not do my actual work, which is concerning to me, as at that
moment, it actually felt wrong to me, intuitively speaking, to do any actual
work. Then I had the thought like "how come I feel like doing my work while I'm
at work and working on Alliant's time is the wrong course of action? Surely
that's wrong."

At the time yesterday, I didn't think much about it beyond that, but for some
reason today I came upon this thought, and immediately came up with this sort
of scheme.

I think it will be best to plan out the exact hours and minutes I have allotted
to do these things, at least at first, so that I can better keep myself hoest
with my actual work time. You see, and I don't know if this is a case of
mistaken priorities or if this is a legitimate way of thinking, but to me
thinks like this journalling and learning Russian, and reading, and the other
things, those things are more important to me than my work at Alliant. Now, you
could argue that I could try and find a way to make my work at Alliant more
fulfilling and fun, and in doing that I could make it one of those things that
I create priority for, but I think that that is not the case, that my work at
Alliant will be where it stands, and I honestly really like this job for the
freedom it gives me to pursue other passions during my work hours, dishonest
though it may be.

So enough on that. I have spent my first twenty minutes of my writing time now
(well, I didn't start right at eight o'clock, but whatever) talking about how I
want to organize my writing time, so let's move on to a different subject now.

So I know last night as I was reading as I do, I ran across a passage in the
Brother's Karamazov that sparked an idea for me, and I remember how I would
forget the idea if I didn't get my phone and speak it out loud, and indeed that
is the case now, and I don't remember the idea. I am just finishing up the
whole section about Mitya's money, and how he claims to have only spent 1500 of
Katya's sum at first and then the 1500 later, but that it goes against all of
the other evidence pointed towards him, and something in these passages sparked
the idea, but even still I don't think it was one of those ideas that was
direcetly related to the story I was reading, so I think it might be gone
forever.

A similar thing is true of the sparse dreams I had last night. I know I had
some sort of dreams last night, but I can't remember anything about them. I do
remember telling myself what it is I should remember about the dreams in order
to have something to write down here, but I took another ten minute nap after
that and proceeded to entirely forget even that, so suffice it to say, I had a
pretty strong sense of "well, I might as well remember a bit of this dream but
even that isn't important" and it must not have been important to my dream,
because I don't remember a bit of it at all.

So enough on that to. How about I talk about things that I actually remember
now.

I visited my father yesterday evening, and I was actually quite comforted by
how well he is doing. I have great confidence that he will have a strong
recovery from this stroke, but I only pray for his soul to be eased. He is
extremely hard on himself, and that frustration is very visible, not only in
his frustration not to conjure up the words for what he wants to say, but also
frustration in the fact that he feels "beaten" in a since, and maybe a little
degraded, and that he isn't able to see his own progress in a way.

However, his progress is very noticably there. Today, as we were watching the
TV, on the TV was a guy named Chuck Yaeger, someone who I have never heard of
before, but who my dad was able to remember from a movie that I forget the name
of now, and it was a movie all about the space race and the pilots around
during that time, and apparently this guy was the first to break the sound
barrier in any moving vehicle. So the memory recall is getting very strong, but
he was so upset at himself because he thought that Clint Eastwood was in that
movie, but he wasn't, but he recognized a lot of other characters from the
movie, and could identify the actors. He asked also to see faces, and upon
seeing the faces gained instant recognition of the people, and was able to
remember the names. So yeah, I think my mom is just trying to scare me by
talking about how poorly he is doing, I swear she has a way of phrasing things
to concern me. But that is a whole nother topic. Basically, I say all of this
just to say that I have pretty full confidence that the path my father is on
will be one that leads to a very strong recovery.

The other thing, and perhaps the more relevent to what I would want to write
about here (actually, the first thing is more in the spirit of what I want to
write here, but this one is too. How about we not get distracted on relevence),
is that my father wanted to tell me about something when I first arrived. When
I first got at the hospital, it was Linda and my dad, and I timed the visit
just wrong, during a shift change, when nurses were changing things about my
dad, and re-orging everything, and they pulled back the curtain, and the first
bit I just spoke with Linda for a bit, and I got the sort of updates from her.

So after that, after the nurses had finished their rounds and it was just the
three of us in the room, Linda went out to get some food while I kept my father
company, and the first thing he wanted to talk to me was this. He started to
try and talk to me, and he struggled on the words pastor at first, but I
gathered that there was a pastor that was visiting, and then he struggled on
the word bowtie, and the imagary of the bowtie was most prominent for him, but
he stuggled on that word quite a bit multiple times in the entire conversation,
but he would always refer to the bowtie when he talked about this. And after we
got past those difficulties, he mentioned that mom had said that I was
struggling with my faith, and with god, and I gave pause to that, and he
noticed that pause (indeed, my father seems to do very well with conversation,
but still not to the point where I could feel comfortable making any sort of
statements that would make him uneasy about his or my position in faith) and I
said that I wasn't struggling, but instead that I just saw the sort of strength
that he gets in his faith, and I see that in him, and that there is something
that we all share, all of us, that we don't know how to describe, and there is
some truth in that that is undeniable. In fact, I am getting this conversation
a bit out of order, because before some of that he mentioned that he had prayed
with the pastor for me, and he pretty much asked me point blank, pretty early
on in that discussion, if I believed. And I replied something like, "Well,
belief is a very broad word that could mean lots of things, and I wouldn't say
I entirely believe in the sense that you would be meaning it right here and
now, but I do see his faith, the faith that you have that gives you your
strength, and that strength is undeniable, and I've always known it to be
there, but to witness it, that it seeing that faith in him has a profound
effect on me, and that it is undeniable that there must be some sort of truth
in that, a truth that is in him, and in me, and a truth that we all share but
none of us can describe, and I certainly believe in that, but" and at this
point I wavered a bit going on about how I wish I could articulate better but
that these things really don't have words, and how many men have tried to
describe but we all fall short of it, and at this my father said "Yes, I fall
short," and I said, "Yes, and I fall short as well, we all fall short" and I
liked that instant reaction by me to place that burden of falling short on all
of us, because I know he feels solely responsible for falling short, but in
that moment I feel I conveyed rather genuinely that not all of the blame should
go to him, and that I shared some of that "falling shortness" and that we all
shared that "falling shortness". Regardless, this entire portrayal of this
conversation is entirely much to disjointed, and I feel as though I have not
done it properly, so I will attempt to put all of the things in the right
order.

So my father mentions the bowtie, and he mentions how he prayed with mom and
the pastor for me. He then asks me if I believe, and I give my answer that I
believe in a certian sense, and that that undeniable truth that I see in him,
"I certainly believe in that" and he said that he liked that. I then went on to
try and continue to articulate, but not knowing how far I could take this and
still be understood, I just mentioned that I was falling short of explaining
myself, and then we had that interaction about falling short.

That is how the conversation went. Holy shit, why was that so difficult to put
in order? I don't think that has anything to do with the fact that it was a
difficult conversation to have, indeed, I am recalling it now with a sort of
indifferent factual interest in mind, but I guess it is because it was a rather
fast and furious conversation. Towards the end of it, I also said something
like "I don't know if that gives you any more or less comfort, but that's where
I stand" or something like that, and he replied with "it does and it doesn't"
so that is that and everything is out there now.

So yeah, the rest of the visit went how you might imagine the visit might go, I
stayed there for a couple of hours before leaving. At the end, he became very
confused. At the time I was not understanding why he was confused, but I think
that he thought that I had to get to yoga (because a lot of other visits I have
made before I have to go to yoga) and when I told him that I wasn't doing yoga
that evening (he asked earlier about BJJ and Yoga and all the things I was
doing) I mentioned that I had gone every day for a month, but that I haven't
gone recently. So as I was leaving, he mentioned that he was very confused, and
I said I wish I knew what I wasn't being entirely clear about, and that I wish
I knew what about what I was saying was making him confused, and he said, I do
to, and I said I'm sure with my laugh, and he mentioned that he like that
laugh. Earlier in the conversation he mentioned the laugh as well, as I feel my
laugh comes out genuinely in these conversations, and I said, "well, I
inherited it from someone", and well, that was all there was to that part, but
he mentioned it a few times during the conversation and then at the end of the
conversation as I was leaving. So yeah.

This time there was no crying or coming on to the verge of tears, instead it
was simply an idle reflection on the visit as I went home. I look forward to
seeing Jason and meeting my father with Jason in the hospital in the next
couple of days, and I am sure I will have a lot to write about that when that
time comes as well.

So yeah, at this point it is my stopping point for my writting for the day, but
I feel like I want to discover more about my short stories, but at the same
time I feel obligated to stick to the schedule of "actually doing work", but at
the same time it's thirty minutes before my chiro appointment, so I'm in this
back and forth. The thing is, I don't have much that I want to discover, I'm
not feeling particularly inspired to discover anything, but I do want to
discover something, because my discovery yesterday felt like it was left sort
of hanging, and I don't like that, and I want to leave it not hanging. But I
think I will be a good person, and get to work, to at least start to get back
to the whole thing again, so I will end this entry here.


