# 20180820
So today I don't have much to talk about. Yesterday I did not write anything
because I really did not have anything to talk about and I didn't feel like
writing about anything. I think that is a good policy. I have been writing an
hour a day, but I think it's good to have a day off. So I think it will be how
I do things from here. If I feel inspired to write, or if I have a crazy dream,
or something of that nature, then I will write, but if not then I just won't
rather then trying to conjure up writing time.

So I do want to talk about some dreams. I know last night, I had some dreams,
but they were mostly fleeting dreams. I remember one of them had to do with jiu
jitsu. I remember, I to the gym in my dream, and there were a bunch of cars
there, and I remember thinking, "wow, why are there so many cars here in the
morning." but then I remember that sometimes there will be cars there but not
people. IRL, there is sometimes a jeep that George keeps there, I'm not sure
how this works, but sometimes there will be a jeep there, and it will just be
there, but the gym is empty still. So I think this is where this comes from,
but instead of just one car, it was a whole bunch of cars. And one of them I
remember was David's truck.

But I remember parking there, and as I went in, I ended up talking with Jamie.
And Jamie, she mentioned that Collin had gotten a new gym, and she was
surprised that she hadn't seen me there yet. And I mentioned that I didn't know
that he had gotten a new place at this point, and that I wasn't sure where it
was or when I might have visited. I think at this point she mentioned that I
should have gotten a facebook invite to it, but if not then I could just show
up. Something like that.

At around this point, I went back to my car, and I got in. I remember there,
there were two sets of a half dozen donuts, one of them being regular glazed
donuts, (sour cream) and the other being chocolate donuts, also sour cream.
Very much a memory of the donuts that I would eat when I lived in my car. And
in one of them, I think it was the chocolate, the one donut was eaten, and I
considered eating one of the plain donuts, but I was apprehensive to. I
remember thinking, "is this what I am doing now, first I give up on
masterbation, and now I just eat donuts also." And I remember considering
eating one, but I didn't get to that point before I woke up.

So yeah, that was that dream. I had a dream the night before, where I was in
the Crossfit Games regionals, and the workout was something like, "duckwalk
across, carry a sandbag back, do that 3 times, then do it again with a heavier
bag." I remember, when the workout first started, that I tried to pick up the
heavy bag, and I stuggled pretty handily with it. Then, I became informed (I
forget by who, maybe Tim Records, because I know he was in the dream) that I
didn't have to start with that bag until the later rounds. I then changed
lanes, towards the far left, (and I am remineded by the Alliant bowling night
by this lane placement) and continued the workout there. I did the duck walk,
and the carrying, and eventually I got into the groove of it, and I did very
well with the whole thing, but I had so much of a late start that I made it to
the last carry when the time went off. I remember thinking at that point,
"Cool, if I were to do that workout again, now that I know how to do it, I
would do much better with it." That was the extent of that dream.

So I have very little I want to talk about. I am merely writing here to keep
the stream of consciousness going. I would like to reveal something interesting
from this stream of consciousness, but I'm not sure if it will happen.

I just picked my nose.

Okay, let's talk about my distractable nature. When I am doing something that I
don't want to do, I constantly distract myself. I find this very intesting when
I am writing, because when I do something to distract myself, such as, say,
going to the restroom when I don't really have to pee, when I come back, and
attempt to get into the point where I was, I will read where I have written to,
and usually it cuts off right at some point, mid sentence, and as I read the
sentence again, it is almost always at a point where the sentance would be
difficult for me to finish. That is, I will write the start of a sentence, and
distract myself, and when I come back, I realize that I stopped myself at a
point where I wasn't sure what to write.

The thing is, it's not the fact that 

For instance, that is a point where I had the urge to go distract myself. I
wasn't sure what exactly it is I wanted to say. I had an idea in my head about
how I wanted to articulate my words, but I couldn't take that idea, and
formualte it into my stream of consciouness without first going through it and
unpacking it and working through my speech centers to come up with the best
words. And it's at that point that the distraction centers of my brain kick in,
and I put down what I am writting and do something else.

Lately, that something else has been something like browse reddit. I think
also, this is where the compulsion to masterbate comes from. I think, "I want
to do something else." and masterbation is a something else that make me feel
good.

And while we're on the topic of masterbation, I want to say that yesterday I
masterbated, but I do not feel near as bad about it today as I did yesterday. I
am of the utmost belief that perhaps once a week should be the ideal
masterbation frequency. Sunday evening makes the most sense to me. So that will
be the plan from this point.

I must say, I feel as though abstainance from masterbation is certainly, well,
it's interesting. I still don't buy into any no-fap garbage, but I do believe
that we are playing with the forces of the universe, and humans, we haven't had
the chemistry of such forces yet, and our evolution has gotten us to this
point, and we think we have the power to halt that, and use it for our own
pleasure. This is foolish. I think it is very foolish. But still, I think it is
not any better to completely forgoe masterbation. That I think is just as
"unnattural" so to speak as masterbating every day.

And when it comes to porn, I feel comfortable with amateur porn, and that sort
of thing. It's not so much that I feel altruistic about the porn industry,
indeed, it would be strange if it were just the porn industry that I felt that
way to, so I'm not going to pretend that I have some sort of disgust for "the
way women are treated" and that's why I don't want to watch hardcore porn, but
I think it's something different to say, "Well, maybe I don't want to watch
that because I know it isn't real." Something about the amateur photos,
especially on the forums where these things are verified, something about it is
more appealing to me. And some women have really, well, the best way to put it
would be, the female figure can be really sexy, and to watch women on reddit
exploring that sort of artistic sexiness, that sort of thing I feel can only be
healthy. At least, it's healthy in the sense that it is taking something that
is repressed, and bringing it out into the open. It is a way of expressing the
truth. And that is more intesteing to me than some hired actors being paid to
put on a show.

How much of this is justification for wanting to masterbate? I don't know. I
think though, every time I go with this no-fap sort of expenditure, I come to a
different point about the whole thing.

Here is the thing though, I think I will end up going more than once a week. I
can already feel it. It's similar to my compulsion to marijuana. I can go many
months (and will have to now, I will pee in the cup tomorrow), without smoking
marijuana, but as soon as I smoke some, and I have some to smoke, I will smoke
it every day, and I have a strong compulsion to do so.

So I think it is similar with masterbation. So I think this, "only once a week
thing." is wrong. It feels wrong. Just in the sense that, placing arbitrary
rules on your behaviors is wrong. I am very much against going against the
impulses of you behavior. Those things must be given in to sometimes. Well,
surely, I think. That's actually a really interesting point. Should your base
behaviors be given in to? That is, should the logical and rational mind allow
the base impulses run free sometimes? Because a rational, logical being would
say that something like masterbation is simply a waste of time, and that other
more interesting things could be done instead. But here, this is the
interesting point, is also, one could argue, that not feeding the monkey within
could cause more harm than the time wasted. Perhaps more time will be wasted by
trying to tame the monkey than by giving in to it. But I think that is simply
my monkey talking. It's similar to an animal. To train an animal, you don't
give in to it's desires. You could make this same argument in training a dog.
"It would take more time to train it properly than it would to 

So interesting, I started to distract myself again. I didn't know what words to
use to finish that thought, so instead of finishing teh thought, I went to look
at the scar on my hand.

So let's come up with something. I need to have some way to recognize these
habitual breaks in concentration. It's 

So there it happened again. Why is this occuring? It seems as though I have the
words I want to say, but articulating them into this form, and having
difficulty in doing so, is where the struggle is coming in. So instead of
trying to come up with teh words, I think instead I should simply come up with
non sense to say in it's stead. Let's start doing that. Every time I recognize
that I might be distracted, instead of doing whatever it was that would
distract me, such as Reddit or Youtube, or some other such time sink, I will
come up with some silly thing to do instead.

The two things I come up with are either writing a bunch of circles on a piece
of paper, or ... I had another thing, but I forgot it.

The alternative is to do something different. Every time I would get
distracted, I should make a mark. And when I make the mark, I should go back to
what it was I was working on when I got distracted, and evaluate why it is that
I am seeking a distraction. Something like that.

I certainly should not give in to youtube or reddit.

And the reason I am talking about all of this in the first place is that
masterbation is certainly not a healthy device with which to distract yourself.
When I am in my room, when I program, I will use masterbation as a distraction,
and that is wholly unhealthy, and creating that association I know for a fact
cannot be a good thing.

So the other thing to do, one would be to write a bunch of circles, and another
would be to do something like, write a bunch of lines, something more organized
than the bunch of circles. I'm not sure what that would be though, and I don't
know which one would be more effective in getting rid of the distraction.

I have to be careful here too, because, well, I don't want "logging the
distraction" to become a new distraction. But I have this idea that maybe I
should log what it is that I was doing, and what the question might be that I
couldn't answer, that caused the distraction. That's an idea. The thing about
this idea though, is that in doing so, it creates a distraction. But if I am
giving in to my distractions in the first place, then perhaps allowing myself
to still be distracted, and to have some object to distract myself towards,
would still be a good thing. Rather, it can't be any worse than going to
youtube.

That's an interesting point as well. It's a really weird thing that happens to
me, and I think probably happens to everyone else as well. They have some sort
of problem, and they have a goal that they want to get to, and they think,
"what's the point of addressing the problem if I can't get to the goal with
addressing it" I have the analogy of weight here, but this could apply to
anything. Someone who is overweight might say, "I weigh 240 pounds, and I would
like to weight 180, but I know I'm not going to get there, so I'm not even
going to bother" But the concept of, if I could make it from 240, and a steady
240, to 235, and a steady 235, why don't I? This isn't the most perfect
analogy, but still, it applies I think to everything that I do. I feel, a lot
of the time, that I want to be at Y, and I am currently at X, and any step I
make, even though it gets me closer to Y, if it doesn't actually get me to Y,
then I will disregard that step as "not accomplishing the goal". This is the
same with this.

I wonder what the cause of this might be? Part of me thinks that it might be a
denial of the current state of things. Especially if in the past I have been at
Y, and I fell to X, there might be some denial about the state I am in.

But that can't be it, because, well, I am admitting to myself that I am at X
right now, I am saying that I provide distractions for myself on the reg, and
that these distractions are inhibiting me from being productive with my work.
So it's not a denial of the current state.

I think what it might be is that I only want to come up with one solution. I
want to take a solution, apply it, and have that be the solution to my problem.
That is, I divide myself into two parts during my life. There is the part of me
that steps back, and evaluates my actions, and decides what sort of actions to
take. Then, there is the other part of me which is my every day living self.
And I think, what happens is, I encounter a problem like this, and I would like
for my "step back" person to interfere as little as neccesary in order to solve
whatever problems my every day self has. So I present a problem to my analyzing
self, and if he comes back to me with a solution that is only a step in the
right direction, but doesn't completely solve my problem, I reject it, because
I say, "you have only given me a solution that is partial, and we will have to
revisit this problem again when this partial solution creates problems, and I
will have to consult you again in the future. I don't want to consult you again
in the future, so go away, and come back to me only when you have a complete
solution to the problem."

And at this, my analytical person would like to say, "But I won't be able to
come up with a complete solution to the problem unless you work with me. We
need to work together here." and to that my base self says, "Why would I
experiment with a solution if I don't know that it is going to accomplish what
I want it to do?" and so my everyday self rejects the idea, and I am stuck in
this loop.

So coming back to the original problem, the problem of distracting myself. So I
think the plan will be thus. I certainly need times for "a break" but I will
make a rule, the rule being, if I am in a time of work, I will work for that
time, and every time I find myself wanting to become distracted, I will write
down the point at which I get distracted by, and I will formulate a question
that I don't know the answer to. I will keep a distractions journal, and I will
not save this journal (although I might at first, but I don't think that it
will be worth anything) but when I notice that I am getting distracted, I will
write down the incedent, I will write what it is I am doing that I get
distracted, and in cases where I actually do get distracted for a good amount,
I will say for how long I was distracted. This will be the plan. We'll see how
it goes.
