# 20180628 Dreams: Arguing with Kyle about Russian letters - Blessing of the Cells

So this is the beginning of my second dedicated journal article. There are a
few things that I want to go over, and I'm not sure which to start with. The
first is a dream I had, that had me waking up a little disturbed, and the
second is I already forgot what it is. Oh, right, it has to do with a text I
got from my mom. Let's start with the dream.

Okay, so today I had a most peculiar dream. Fortunately, this one did not
involve marijuana in any way (the last dream I had was a couple nights ago, and
very much had to do with marijuana, but I that one, though it might be worth
writing down, was not near as interesting phycologically as this one). The
dream started (or at least the first thing I remember about the dream) in the
parking lot of a park. This park was similar to a park I remember visiting as a
kid where we had a sort of PE session once. The parking lot was on let's say
the south end of the park (this detail is not relevent, and I am only using
south to give indications of direction) and has a sort of open field from this
lot. I am referring to strictly the dream park by the way, and I don't think
this childhood PE experience has anything to do with the dream. Anyway, from
that parking lot, it opens into a sort of open field, but it's not really fully
open as there were paths and trees and stuff, so the field wasn't open enough
to play any sort of sport on, but there was a grassy part. Across this grassy
part, parallel to the parking lot, there was a path that goes across, and
across this path from the lot, was a sparsly wooded area. Not wooded, but there
were enough trees for that to be a detail that I noticed. In the dream I don't
go past this part, so that part of the dream is not really expanded upon, but
in the dream I knew it to contain picnic tables and things, where families
might bring food and picnic things and have a nice family night out. So in this
dream, the first thing I remember is being in a suburban, similar to the
suburban my mom had when we were growing up, and I am driving this suburban. I
remember my mom being involved in the dream somehow, I think she was in the
passenger side of the vehicle, and Kyle I know was in the back seat. So I'm in
the parking lot, and I remember saying something to the effect of "hey, lets go
over to the creek side of this park, I'd like to show it to you" or something
like that. You see, this from the parking lot of this park, one could drive to
the west (again, irrelevent direction) and towards the west side of the park
it became more dense, there were different things to do, and it was the same
park as the park where families might picnic, but in this area of the park were
sports fields and things of that nature along with a bit more winding road and
such. So I drive over to that part of the park, and at some point along the
ride, I remember making the decision that we were done there and that we wanted
to go home. Instead of using my phone to find the directions home, however, I
remember thinking something like I wanted to just find the way home and I
thought I knew it. So as I start to drive through this other section of the
park, driving as if on autopilot, driving through roads without thinking as if
I had taken this path many times before, Kyle starts reading to me about
Russian pronouncations. You see, I have been learning Russian lately, but I
have only just started, and at this point I have not gone beyond learning the
alphebet, which is why this came up in the dream. So Kyle start showing me
letters, and they just appear in the dream, and I start reciting them back to
him, the way they are pronounced. And what ends up happening is, Kyle gives me
a letter, I give him back the correct answer, but Kyle then tells me it is the
wrong answer. When I question him on it, he insists that it is the wrong
answer. In fact, I remember the letters, it was ю, and я, which are "yoo" and
"ya", and I know for a fact I said something in the dream like, "I know the
backwards R one is Ya" but Kyle kept insisting that it was "ee", and I said no,
"ee" is и, but I didn't put together until just now that they are both backward
versions of other english letters, and in the dream I was just insisting that
the backward R was not the sound "ee" but "ya". I remember getting very upset
in the dream at Kyle, and eventually I made it to a dead end in the road, a
sort of dead end that was the end of a parking lot where soccer moms might park
when their child has a game at the very end of the park, and beyond the soccer
fields I know there was a densly wooded area with a creek that marked the edge
of the park, and I knew that I was lost. So at this point I decide to stop
arguing with Kyle about the russian letters, and I begin to make my way back to
the original parking lot that I mentioned when the dream first started (or
rather back to when I first remember the dream), and when I make it back to
that parking lot, I am met by my dad. I don't remember driving up to him,
(indeed, I don't remember looking out of the car when I was driving at all, and
most of my dream took place inside the scope of the suburban) but I do
remember, when I was right next to him, I pulled up beside him in a parking
spot, and he was simply standing there, and I stopped so that he could open the
passenger side door and get in the car. At this point I think my mom had
magically gotten in the back seat, since she had gone out of my memory by that
point in the dream, and so the passenger seat was open, so my dad got in, and
he was upset, as if I was not doing as I was told, and that he was displeased
with my defience, and he might have said something, but at this point in the
dream I remember conceding to looking up my home address (1700 Tulane Dr., the
address of my parents house) on my phone, and starting up the GPS. At this
point, my dad commanded me to drive home, in the stern way that he does, and
after looking up the address I placed the phone GPS beside me like I do when I
drive with the GPS and began to make my way home. As I began to leave this
parking lot of the park, and go out on the road which ran North-South, which
was just east of the park, and marked the other end of the park, is when the
dream ended.

The reason I spell out this dream is not because I think anything remarkable
happened, but when I woke I was almost in a sweat. I knew I didn't have the
time near my, but looking outside I could tell that while it certainly was
morning, I knew I had not overslept, and I had my tablet next to me, which as I
mentioned in my previous article I have recently acquired, and I went to check
if it had finished it's windows updates, because I remembered that it had to do
that recently, and also to check the time on it, and it said something like
11:38. I had a very breif moment of panic, so breif in fact that the moment of
panic did not even happen as a realized that there was no way that it was past
11, and at the very worst I thought that it could only be 7:38, and the time
was off by a timezone. Upon opening the browser, I found that it was 6:38 in
the central time zone, and at that point I began to wake for real. It was nice,
feeling that awake at that time of day, and since today is a Thrusday and I
have no obligation to make my way to the gym to practice with Paco, I had
plenty of time to collect myself, have some water, drink some juice, rotate the
laundry, and perform some morning tasks that I usually perform in a bit more
hurry (or rather, not hurry, but with a sense of guilt as my morning tasks run
in to the time that I should be at work).

What struck me about this dream though, was two things. The first is my arguing
with Kyle about russian letters, which I now understand was probably my brain
sorting out which backward english letters coorespond to which russian sounds.
The fact that I got so upset at him for that though, actually does concern me,
and I don't feel guilty about it (for how can one ever feel guilty about the
happennings of a dream?) but it did disturb me for quite some time. I also have
been meaning to spend more time learning russian, but have let other things
take precedence, in particular, reading and writing in english, which I greatly
enjoy. So I think there was a bit of apprehension and insecurity about my lack
of learning Russian in the dream as well. There is probably some significance
to the fact that it was Kyle I was getting upset at, and this dream does remind
me of one road trip back in the days when I used to play Go, and I wanted to
try my hand at blind Go during this trip, and I remember getting upset at Kyle,
because he had some sort of handheld device that he was keeping track of and
playing the stones on, and when we got to move 30 or so, I tried to play a
stone and he informed me that a stone had already been played at that position,
and I remember arguing with him that there was not a stone on that position,
and that he must have made some mistake in interpreting the moves I had given
him, because earlier, I had remembered playing in a different way. At that
point, I remember my dad making a comment that the one who could see the stones
was probably right, and maybe he was, but I disliked that my opinion on the
matter was being shrugged off so matter-of-factly, and I remember at the very
lesat thinking that, while it could be true that my memory of the board state
could very easily be wrong, I also had strong memory of playing the stone in a
different position, and not only did I have memory, but I had reasoning as to
why I would have placed that stone in the place I did, and I also knew how the
way I phrased the way the stone was placed could be mis-interpreted by Kyle,
who did not enjoy Go at all in the way I did. So at that point, as I thought to
it, I am almost certain what happened is I told him to place the stone in a
certain way in relation to the other stones (because trying to keep track of
absolute positioning I knew would be too hard for me) and Kyle misinterpreted
my words and placed the stone in the wrong location, and that created a board
state on the handheld which was different than the state in my head. All of
this ended pretty much at that point, because I remember trying to continue on,
but after about 30 stones I knew the board state would be difficult to remember
anyway, as Go board states can get very complicated rather quickly, and this
entire thing was just an attempt to handicap myself to the point where I could
even get Kyle to play with me in the first place, and I knew that he had no
real interest anyway, and that the only reason he would even humor me in that
moment was because of the boredom of a long road trip, so at that point we
dismissed the game, and I remember suggesting perhaps we play for real, but
Kyle didn't want to, and that was that.

That whole experience, and me being upset at both Kyle and in a lesser way my
dad, was the first memory that came in to my mind after I woke from my dream
today. It was probably almost exactly ten or eleven years ago that this
happened, and I am certain that this memory led to the events of the dream
today. In fact, the concept of Kyle giving me "the state of things how it is"
(either a Go board state, or the association of Russian letters to their
pronounciation) and me trying to recall that state from memory is so strikingly
similar that I feel this has to be the reason for the inclusion of Kyle in my
dream today. And also the inclusion of my father as well. That's actually
really fascinating, now that I think about it, how very similar the memory fits
the dream, but with my current task of learning Russian rather than my task of
playing a game of Go.

So yeah, most of this session has been dominated by that dream, so much so that
I haven't even got to the second part I wanted to talk about which is the text
(or rather, group text sent to me, my brothers, lacey, and Granny and Papa)
sent by my mom. The reason I find this text so interesting is a couple things.
The first is that I didn't fully understand the text at first, and actually had
to look up a word to understand really what was going on, and the second is my
reaction to it. So enough mystery about it, this is the text in it's entirety.

    Text Message
    Tuesday 11:17 AM
    Ann Webster Family

    We just had the
    blessing of the cells
    with the Chaplin and
    they are hanging the
    stem cells.

That is the exact text as it appears in my phone as of this moment. One thing I
will say is that I did not see this text until I got back from Jiu-Jitsu class
that lunch, which would have been about an hour later, and by that point,
multiple people had responded with things like "praying for you" and stuff like
that. There was also a text sent from my mom sent at 11:28 (after both her
parents had responded) saying "\*chaplian" (escape sequence mine since
markdown), which followed with a text from Lacey, also giving her prayers.

So what struck me first about this was, I when I first saw this message, it
showed up as seven messages in my phone, since it was a group message and a
bunch had already responded. (Me nor any of my brothers responded) So when I
read the first message, I didn't know what a Chaplin was, and the correction to
chaplain didn't help either. When I first read the message, I just saw
"blessing" and thought she was asking for blessings, like someone may do,
similar to how someone may ask for prayers, but upon reading it further, I
realized that it read "the blessing of the cells", so I thought maybe she was
asking for us to pray for the cells to be blessed, which I also thought was
strange, but I know both my parent but particularly my mom can be very
superstitious when it comes to religion and things of that nature. My mom is
the sort that believes in the bible literally, and takes the six thousand year
interpretation of the world to be the actual truth. I don't resent her for it
(much), but I am fascintated by it because she is otherwise a rather
intelligent woman. However, upon getting to the point where I could entirely
read the message and comprehend what it said, I noticed that "the blessing of
the cells" was an event that happened with "the Chaplin" (chaplain as she
corrected herself later) and that it was an event that happened before the
transfusion. This is all I have to go on.

Now, at this point, I very much want to say that I do not intend to bring this
up pretty much to anyone. It was one text message, and if some ass hole wants
to give his blessing to a bag of Evan's blood before an extremely delicate and
scary (there must be a better word than scary to describe the chance of 20
percent death and 50 percent prognosis, as I don't want to portray fear, but
rather the sense of, this shit is serious and must be taken seriously)
infusion, and if that blessing make my mom, and maybe my dad too, I don't know,
but definitely my mom, feel better, than so be it. I don't care of the pope
himself comes with his stupid hat kisses the rod they use to hang, as long as
the pope isn't ill and it doesn't effect the procedure in any way. However, I
did not know what I chaplain was, and had to look it up to find out that a
chaplain is like a pastor, but the word chaplain is used when he is the
religous figure of an institution such as a hospital or prison or other such
place, so that the cells were blessed by the guy who I'm sure does this shit
all the time around there.

And that is what got me to thinking, how gross and disgusting that practice is.
I'm all for giving people a sense of hope or meaning, that kind of shit is what
things like Christianity is for, it's for people who don't have an explanation
for the things that happen in the world and inside ourselves, so they come to
the lowest hanging fruit because that fruit makes sense to them, and if eating
of that fruit helps them cope, or deal, or otherwise make better of their lives
in a positive way, than who am I to say that the fruit isn't there and that
it's the product of thousands of years of in-factual cultural evolution?
However, it's not the actual blessing of the cells which disgusts me, it's the
concept that somehow this chaplain has more right, or more capability, or more
divinity with the lord that he should do it rather than someone close to the
people involved. This is how this ass hole makes his living, is by telling
people that he is able to bless their cells, and that the lord will guide the
doctors hands, and he will use this farce to give hope to people in desperate
situations, and that's how he makes his living. It's fucking gross. Like
despicably gross.

And obviously, even bringing up the topic of this text message would be wrong
to do with my family, even my brothers. Perhaps Jason would be the only one I
would come close to saying anything to, but he and I aren't close enough that
something as trival as this text message that we both received would be a topic
of conversation that he and I would have together. So instead this is something
that will most likely never be discuss except long in the future when my dad
has recovered and I bring it up in a conversation over dinner or something, and
even then it the topic of religion is still such a touchy one, even with my
mom, that we are all wise enough to avoid the subject completely. So this is
what I'm left with.

I could go on a little bit, but I'm over my time and I have to get back to
work, so I will leave it at that. It just gives me a strange sense of discord,
not only my opinion of this text message and also my reaction to it and the
fact that I can't rectify it by bringing it up. It's amazing how utterly wrong
and disgusted it makes me feel over something that shouldn't be that big of a
deal. And it's not that big of a deal, I can very easily move on with my life,
but this is just one more thing about religion and my parents that will never
be aligned, and it makes me want to vomit. That is all.

Until next time.


