# 20180711 Dream: Evan takes acid - Musings of my father - Discovery of the Hermit
So today I had a dream that I remember thinking about how much I wanted to talk
about it, and I don't remember some of the details now that I have neglected to
get to it for so long today. And that fault is my own. I will just begin to
talk about it, and see how many details come back to me.

So I know the main bulk of the dream that I remember is at a location, a sort
of park, and at this park (a different park than I have described in the past,
but more like a park that I went to and beheld in colorado, but still different
than that) I was there to join in sort of a "pick-up practice" ultimate game,
an in the previous part of the dream, before this part with the park, I
remember talking with mom, and Evan was there, and there wasn't anything
particularly memorable about this event, except there was a note that I told
myself I would remember about this conversation that I forget now, it had
something to do with something Evan said. Regardless, let me spoil the dream
and say that Evan takes acid between these two events, and I remember the thing
I wanted to note about the before thing was that Evan said something, or was
acting in a certain (rather normal and not at all uncanny) way, and I thought
that it would be the first thing I would forget about this dream. Oh, I
remember now, it has to do with the fact that I took mom on a walk a couple of
days ago, and how I neglected Evan, it had to do with that, and I remember
something of saying like "let's do that". Okay, so I remember, as I park at the
park, I remember Evan coming up to me, and he was very excited. He was telling
me all about this acid trip that he went on, and how it opened up his mind, and
that he knows how to talk more, and that he always knew how to talk, but now he
has realized that he knows how to actually do it more, and he has reason to,
and he is so excited about this whole thing that I couldn't help but feel happy
for him and his new found discovery. I then mentioned something about how I did
mushrooms once, and I asked him to relay what the trip was like on acid because
I had considered doing acid before, but I've never had the means nor the
strong desire to seek those means, so it has never happened to me, but I was
curious what his telling of it was like so that I could compare it to my
mushroom trips. And right as I was asking him about these things, and he was
about to excitedly tell me about all of the trip, mom starts to walk up, and I
hear a voice say something like, "eh,eh,eh" in quick succession like that,
almost like Kyle's voice but Kyle wasn't in the scene, but basically a quick
voice like that that was like "hey, stop what you're talking about because mom
is walking up." So mom starts to walk up, and she trys to make the usual
pleasentries, but what I remember is that she sort of killed the conversation,
and we just went on and I told her about how I was considering joining this
"pick-up ultimate drilling" that was going on, but I was undecided about the
whole thing, and was sort of on the fence, and I remember trying to think of a
way to come up with an excuse for me and Evan to be alone again so he could
tell me about his trip, but it was around that point that I woke up and the
dream ended.

So yeah, that was the dream. Thinking on it, it definitely has to do with the
walk that I had with my mom a couple days ago, and obviously Evan is on my mind
just as far as I do have some concern for his prospects in life, him being a
difficult nut to crack.

Something I do want to ask Evan is, "is anything ever profound to you?" I want
to ask him this because I'm not sure if the answer would be yes or not. The
answer is certainly yes for me, and the answer is in fact that everything is
profound to me, and it's more a matter of degree of profoundity than it is the
actual fact that something is profound. I am just curious what his answer would
be.

Anyway, with that dream out of the way, I do sort of want to go into some
bookkeeping things for my journal. My back is feeling much better after a day
of ice and Ibuprofin, and all that good stuff. I went to morning training with
Paco, and Rose was there as well, so we had a morning training threesome going
on there.

Also, I have spent a lot of my work day planning out how lit.vim plugin, and I
am actually quite happy with what I have done so far. I have essenitially
gotten to the point where I have hacked together some functions that serve to
label the source headers and such, and at this point I need to get to the point
where what is written will get relayed to a reference file that will serve as a
wonderful literary tool for "seeing through" a piece of work. The fact that I
am using vimscript exclusively has me worried that I will write this entire
thing in a contemptuously hacky way, but I am not so overly concerned as I am
getting work done, and doing it in vimscript means that it will be appliciable
pretty directly to the tablet and to my reading material so that I am don't
have to worry about any interop capabilities. The only thing I'm worried about
is getting to a point where I would require the abstraction of a legitimate
programming language, and at that point then I would have to concern myself
with compatibility between the two and so on, so we will see if I decide to go
that route.

Besides that, I do plan to visit my father today. Speaking breifly about him, I
have read a little bit more about Aphasia, the consequences of his stroke, and
it seems that I will have a much better idea about his fate in a month.
However, my strong feeling that I have that I shrug away occasionally, the
feeling I have had that I don't tell anyone about that this is indeed the end,
I think this is the way that feeling is manifesting itself. I can only pray
that he make strong recovery towards being able to at least speak and not soil
himself and move around and eat and all of those things, because if he doesn't
he could be living a pretty miserable life, miserable maybe not for others who
live that life and resign themselves to it, but miserable for him because he
will never resign himself to it I know and I fear that his strength will
overreach his capabilities. I do not fear that he will ever give up, but I fear
that futility will his strongest emotion in this time. I only pray that he
recovers enough to be able to return home with my mother, and that he won't be
resigned to a facility for stroke victims. That would be terrible terrible
suffereing for him, especially depending on the nature of the facility.

I wanted to keep that breif, but just writing that brief paragraph has brought
me to a state of discomfort for him, and I don't know how to transition into
another topic. I could discover more about my story, but I am not feeling so
inspired to do that. I mean, I guess all I would have to do to do that would be
to start talking about the story again, somewhere where I left off, and see
where the conversations go.

In fact, now that I think about it, I had a couple ideas last night that I did
not record, that I now wish I had because they were good. I know it was sparked
by my reading of the Brothers Karamazov, the scene where Mitya is being
questioned about his father. Oh, my idea was this, and it's quite a wretched
idea, and the fact that it comes to me almost disturbes me, and writing about
it is something that I feel would not create any sort of good feeling in me at
all. Indeed, sometimes disconcordant feeling can be interesting, but this
feeling is just strange, as if I know it's a path that doesn't lead to anything
good. It's just sadness and suffering, and there is nothing good that comes out
of it.

I will go ahead and say what this idea was, but I do think I have already
decided that I am not going to write a story such as this, so I'm not sure if
there is really a point to it. The idea is... I can't. Shit. Okay, so I feel as
though I haven't prefaced this enough, or perhaps I have prefaced it too much.
Basically, the idea is of a son that kills his father in a vegatable state, out
of suppossed and misguided mercy for him. However, I dislike this idea for a
multitude of reasons. Besides the obvious that it would re-enforce a mind
pathway that I don't want to re-enforce in myself, besides that simple fact
that it would be unhealthy for me to write a story like that (and also it would
give concern to anyone who read it, as it is so strikingly close to my current
situtation, and they might think that I was legimately stuggling with that idea
when I am not), but also because I don't think it would make a very interesting
story. Indeed, I have not read yet Crime and Punishment, but I know that this
idea of killing someone for not the typical reasons of murder but for a
supposed saintly reason has been explored greatly and with much more well
spoken literary prowess (I can only assume) than I could give. That, and I just
don't see how this story would go to make any interesting or remarkable points,
especially if I told it in that way. It seems more like the topic of a CSI
syndicate than it is an actual well thought out novel or story, so I will pass
on saying any more about this silly idea.

So I will instead diverge to more discovery of my "The Hermit" story (and I
like that title for the story, although I am certainly not so fond of it to say
that it is for sure the final title of the story) by starting with a brief
description of how I know the outline should go.

So the story should start with the description of the hermit, and his life in
his hermitage. I don't want to give any more background on him or his
motivations for becoming a hermit, but I do want to talk about some of his
habits, how he cultivates his garden, his fasting rituals, and the like, to
give a sort of scene of how this man lives his life. I then want to, after
talking about this entire thing (or perhaps before, that could be the hook to
this section) tell of how his hermaitage had been raided by some animal, and
all of the food he had gathered to break his fast was utterly gone, even his
emergency supplies, and so he knew that unless he were to do something about
it, he would undoubtedly starve. So I want then this hermit to go out into the
woods to gather some berries, but as he does, something happens to him. I have
not decided yet whether or not he is attacked by some animal. Maybe he has a
heart attack. I actually like that, and even though I have no longer had a
heart attack, him having a heart attack in the forest there is a good closing
to that section. I like the heart attack over animal attack, as the heart
attack is more likely a course of how events might play. And as he has the
heart attack, he has the thought that "this is how I die, this is the end for
me" and he comes to peace with that and closes his eyes and everything turns
black.

At this point is where the initial hook should end. From there, I then want to
jump to the scene which will lead to the murder of my four characters. I want
them to be all together, perhaps on the way to something or some activity, but
when they do they run across someone, someone who is perhaps a friend, or at
least not someone who is an acquaintence, and they meet him to gather supplies.
Indeed, maybe they are out in the wilderness, all four of them, and they go to
a humble shop that they know to be there. And they are hunting, that is what
they are doing. And so the dogmatic athiest has his gun (they all have their
guns) as they go into this remote shop (or maybe it is a house in a remote
village). Actually, I really like the idea of a remote village in Alaska. I
like that because it's believable as far as I know that there are a lot of
villages and things there, and it could be a good spot for a hermitage. I like
it too because it's forseeable that there could be some sort of getaway there.
So I think the way I want this to happen, (and I am surprised I am discovering
this at this moment, but so be it) is for the group to get in an argument with
this guy. Maybe they want certain supplies, or something, and they are asking
this man for some, but he won't give them. So the dogmatic athiest pulls his
gun on the guy, and threatens him and when the guy stares down his gun and
says, "What are you doing, do you really plan to shoot me" the guy does, and
his gun fires. Then, in teh commotion that follows, it will be revealed later
that he didn't realize the gun was loaded, and that it was an honest mistake. I
could then go on to talk about the concept of how an honest mistake could have
different consequences.

I'm not entirely satisfied with this sequence of events. Another way this could
play out is, as they are having dinner with this guy, (and a difficulty that I
just thought would be the fact that people would probably know that this group
of four was coming to visit. This could be solved by having the guy that is
killed be a recent inductee to Alaska, and that he is not well connected yet,
and his friends are coming to visit him in a sort of homecoming) as they are
having dinner, the dogmatic athiest gets caught up in a story, and as he gets
caught up in his story, he gets out of his seat, and to demonstrate something,
maybe to demonstrate the prowess of his skeet shooting abilities, or perhaps in
dramatic effect, or, and I like this now that I think about it, he is talking
about this time he looked down the barrel of a gun. And as he does so, he asks
the guy "have you ever looked down the barrel of a gun?" and he pulls out his
rifle and points it at him in a sudden movement. And I want to describe the guy
become very uncomfortable, and recoil, and say something like, "No, I haven't
until this point, and I can quite say you have made your point. You are making
me very uncomfortable right now, and I would appreciate if you would
withdraw..." and at that word withdraw the gun should fire. I would then
describe the hole in his head, perhaps in some way to indicate a sort of
symbolism, an empty hole in his forehead as if it were the socket of his third
eye, or something like that, and without a doubt the man was dead. The
description of his dead body, and of the scene that happens soon after, I'm not
sure, but in this way, the killer, the dogmatic athiest, begins to reel back,
and say something like "well that was quite impossible, quite impossible
indeed, the gun was not loaded and I had the safety on, and my finger was not
even on the trigger." and he examines the gun to find that the safety was
indeed on and he shows it to the cynical agnostic, who replies with something
like "well, regardless of how impossible it was, it's certainly difficult to
argue with the dead man here". Indeed, this entire scene will be difficult to
write, and it will be easier once I have discovered better my characters.
However, I do believe I have discovered the event which led to this, and more
or less the situation in how it plays out.

So after they gather themselves and have a discussion about what to do, the
four of them elect to take the man out, and bury him deep in the wilderness,
far away from the house they were in at that time. And as they go out to bury
him, I could examine some of their thoughts maybe. I could say how on their
trek, maybe one of them says, "Is this far enough" and someone starts to lose
his shit on the killer, and they all go through this struggle, until they
eventually decide that they have found their spot, somewhere in the woods, and
after they bury him, and they try and retrace their steps back to the town,
they get into an argument about a few things. First would be an argument about
whether or not they should even go back to the village, and I just thought of a
comment, something like "well if we don't go back we might as well dig four
more holes for all of us to lie in" or something like that. At some point also,
I want them to talk about their situation, and second guess their decision to
bury the guy and feign innocence, and for the agnostic to say something like
"indeed, I'm sure if we explained everything exactly how it happened, we could
be pardoned on counts of manslaughter" but then the killer would say something
like "and what's to say a story doesn't come out that we were all in it
together"

I have to give pause here, I'm not entirely liking where this is going. I like
the concept of "divine intervention caused the bullet to be fired" but I don't
like that one of them is entirely more guilty than the other three. I need them
to be all guilty of the crime in at least a comparable way, beyond being just
witnesses. I'm not sure how much I really do like this version of the crime.

I will have to figure it out. Maybe the crime is not murder, but maybe they
were up to something anyway, maybe they were all a part of some different crime
all together, that resulted in one of them pointing his gun to threaten
someone, and then the gun fired, and then they have to deal with that all
together. I like that better, in as far as it makes them all guilty, and it
allows me to write the line "And once they had degraded themselves to burglary,
why not also hide the murder" or something worded better than that, to describe
how they resolve to be in agreement about what to do from there.

What I don't like about all of these is that it limits what sorts of characters
I can write. In this version, all of the characters have to be criminals, and
that goes against having a goody two shoes Christian character. Perhaps there
are three of them tied to the burglary, and they call up their good two shoes
friend, who gets dragged into the whole thing. I like that. The athiest is
certainly the one who's gun fires, and I think the agnostic I am cool with
being there, although that would require him to have a nihilistic attitude.
Indeed, he could be a nihilist, although not a hedonist. Indeed, his
nervousness at the whole situation could be a catalyst for discussion. The
getaway driver could be the converted Christain, and that converted Christian
could be the one to call the goody two shoes.

The thing I dislike about all of these things is that it creates so much
tension, and I feel as though the tension created will overwhelm the
disscussions of the actual works of the hermit, which is what I want the focal
point to be. So perhaps the murder is not something that I want, maybe that is
too much. I'm not sure. I'll have to think on it. I might have to discover more
about these characters before I come up with more plot points.


