# 20180823
So today I had some ideas about my story. I have discovered a bit last night,
that the reason I am having a hard time writing my section about Damien and
Kimberly discovering the death of Brett, is because I am trying to write it in
a way that it didn't happen. I like the idea that Kimberly is setting up a
date, but I think that Damien reads the email and discovers the death of Brett,
on his own.

So I have tried my best to think about the scenes. The thing about imagining
the scenes is, when you have a picture in your head, you have what the scene
should be, but when you go then to write the scene out, it becomes difficult to
decide what parts of the picture are worth writing into words. For instance,
what I'm getting at here is, I have a vivid image of Kimberly cooking a dinner
in her apartment, which is very much like my own in my head, but I feel like
it's not worth describing any of the details of what she is doing in the actual
story. Like, in my head, she is cooking chicken, and making green beans, with
some dirty rice on the stove, and she is juggling all of the things together,
and making a salad, and so on and so on, and if I were to just describe out
that entire scene, I could do it, but I garuntee that it would all get cut in
the final draft. And you could argue that I should just write it all out and
then cut it later, which honestly has a lot of merit to it, but still, it seems
wrong to go through all of the details.

For instance, should I have a paragraph that describes the layout of the
apartment? That is wholly unneccesary, and doesn't add to the story of the
hermit at all. Should I describe the color of the counter, and the manner in
which she chopped the celary that was to go into the stew (or whatever) and
again, the answer is, "no, I shouldn't, that doesn't contribute to the story".

I think the distinction here is, with this story I am writing not for escapism.
That is something totally different. That is the idea I get when I read
something like King. He has paragraphs that just mention details about a room
or something, which I assume have no impact on the later development of the
story. For instance, he mentioned that there was some brand of office supplies
on the desk that that the main character was being interviewed by. To me, this
serves only to help the reader "escape" into the world that King is making for
us, but I doubt that the color and brand of the stapler, or even the fact that
there is a stapler on the desk, ever comes up again.

I am being a little cynical here. The purpose that King will add these details
is so that, by seeing these details, we will get a better idea about the
character we are meant to familiarize ourself with. This is the real purpose
behind the "boring and pointless details". But there is another scene, further
on, where Jack is thinking about circumstances that happened in his life as the
caretaker is showing him the boilers in the basement. I remember the caretaker
talking about the flame, and King describing the flame as something that would
take you if it had the chance, or something like that. And this is the sort of
thing where, again, I think the imagary of the flame is there just to give the
reader a since of "there is a flame at the belly of this hotel." It gives the
hotel something of a life of it's own, and the flame symolism is used to
capture that.

So that's part of my issue, is that the details I am thinking of don't
contribute even in this sort of way to my story. In fact, I am so inclined to
believe that they detract. My story, like I said, is not an escapism story, I
want it to be much more of an abstract philosophical novel, and I want the
story, the details, to be the bare minimum required in order to facilitate the
dialog that goes through the minds of the characters.

So for instance, I have a much more vivid picture of the awakenining in the
cave. What happens in my mind there is very concrete, and I haven't discovered
the whole scene in my mind yet, but I know more or less how it goes, and I know
what details there are crucial and which ones are not. There are aspects of it
which I am not sure of the best way to describe without the words coming out in
a clunky way, but irrespective of that, I know which details are important, and
I have a notion of how explicit to be with some of the symbolism.

Likewise, I have something of an idea of the event of Michael calling Damien
and revealing the seizure that Susan has.

So I think, what I am missing is not the details of what happens, what I am
missing is dialog. I think what needs to happen is I need to discover how these
characters interact after what they have seen. Rather, I need to discover the
dialog of the characters. I need to think of philosophical ideas in this
context, and I need them to come out.

Again though, where I am severly lacking is the romantic department. I have
very little (read no) experience with being a boyfriend, or having a
girlfriend, and trying to write about characters that are in relationships, it
feels wrong. These characters, they do all represent different aspects of
myself, but I have not lived these characters. Maybe that is what is missing. I
think that is it actually.

Since I have never been in a relationship, I should not write about characters
in relationships. Michael can certainly represent someone that is trying to
chase after Susan. In fact, I like the idea of Michael being a character that
has just recently started coming to church, and is trying to "get with" Susan.

I have just discovered I think Damien and Kimberly's relationship. Kimberly is
Kim, the girl I dated. I want to write about Damien asking Kim out, and it will
happen almost exactly as I asked Kim out. The context is slightly different,
but that is fine. Then, on their second date, that is when Damien get's word
that Brett is dead.

The retreat does not have to be far. It could be a campsite even. It doesn't
have to be buddhist, it's just a campsite, but it's a campsite that has a
special site for the secluded. It's a premium, they advertise it as a week long
religious retreat, and they pride themselves on the fact that the cabin has
been around in it's original state for some number of years. I like this a lot
better. This way, it's not an entire flight, everyone can just drive to the
retreat. It's maybe two hours away, but far enough to be a legit retreat.

Okay, so I like that a lot better. I also really like the scene with the
awakening, I want there to be a moment where Damien thinks about reaching for
Kimberly's hand, but doesn't, similar to my thinking about reaching for Kim's
hand, but not. I like the fact that their relationship is much more like my
relationship with her. That works so much better. Or rather, it might not work
better, but it fits within the realm of what I feel comfortable writing so much
better.

Michael can represent me, the version of me that would agree with everything a
woman says just because she is the object of my attraction. Susan knew Brett
through church, when they went through church, and the reason she is visiting,
I think, is because. Shit, who is Susan. Why does she know Brett?

Something I have also thought, is that, in order to prove the validity of the
hermit's documents, the orator (god) will tell him that he can sense the
destruction of many through the use of nuclear power. I want it to be important
that the god doesn't know the name of these things, but I want him to describe
the events of World War II in a vague way, followed by explaining that the
secrets underlying some of the nature in which he put together the world will
be exploited and cause the death of many people, twice, on the island of Japan,
and that the same power will be used later to harness energy that people will
be able to use.

So what I have come to today is this. First, my characters need to be more like
myself, and less like characters that are not myself. Second, nuclear power is
the thing that the god gives as proof that he is telling the truth.

So these issues have been resolved, and I now have a much better understanding
of how my story goes.

Susan is reading a bible verse (or maybe not even a verse, maybe just some
inspirational bible related, or not bible related verse) and she has a moment
where she is asking god for assistance, or something like, for god to give her
a sign, and it is then that she gets the news that Brett has died.

Scartch that, Susan was Brett's youth group leader. That's perfect. Michael is
her husband.

So I do want to come up with a better outline now.

Prologue

Damien, after talking with a student about his ideas regarding Physics, gets an
email from Brett.

Kimberly, preparing for her second date with Damien, (and here we could talk
about something of her expectations of the date) gets a call from Damien, where
he says he has to call off the date. Upon learning that it is Brett, we hear
that Kimberly actually knew Brett from one of her classes, and she asks to go
with him.

Upon arriving at the retreat, Damien and Kimberly meet Susan and Michael at the
visitor center. The host talks over what has happened. Susan asks for the four
of them to gather together and pray for Brett's soul.

The four go to the hermitage. They investigate things there. Brett's belongings
have not been triffled with, and there is very little of his belongings there.
As they are about to leave, Damien thinks for a moment about Brett. He
remembers a quirk about him, that he would always leave things in some obscure
place. He decides to go to that place, and finds the letter. (I also have a
conversation in mind between Kimberly and Susan here, where Susan inquires
about her relationship to Damien and uses it as a stepping point to explore
Kimberlies beliefs.) (I also need at some point a conversation between Michael
and Damien, to explore Damien's atheism, as well as Michael's background)

Damien reads the letter (which is given to the reader at this point). He finds
the documents that talk about the cave. Here, Damien comes out and reveals what
he has found. There is a discussion about whether or not they should venture to
the cave. Damien thinks the whole thing has to be some sort of farce, but Susan
says it's the work of the devil. At this, Damien resolves to go and prove that
there is no cave. Kimberly decides to go with him after Damien asks, giving her
own reasons. Susan is very opposed to the idea, but Damien and Kimberly go
anyway, and Susan goes in an effort to save them, and has Michael carry her.

(At this point, I have some plot holes. Depending on how Brett died, there
could very easily be some authorities or something else, some sort of
investigation, on Brett's death. Something I just thought, Damien should be the
emergency contact. The biggest plot hole, I guess, is that it doesn't make
sense to me that this retreat would just be open to letting these four walk
freely about, especially after some one has died. I'm not too concerned about
this plot hole, but it is there and it needs to be addressed. I have this
notion that the four sneak around whatever park ranger and go to the cave
against their wishes. Also, I want this cave to be untouched by man, it's not
the attraction of tourists, but that seems unlikely given the situation.
Something I think is, maybe the cave will be described as being "at the end of
the stream that runs down," or something like that. And the being, he creates
the cave for the purpose of these four. I like that. That resolves that plot
hole, and gives more significance to both the snake and the cave. Also, I
think, Brett was not attacked by a bear. He was killed by a snake. I also like
the idea that it's not a decision by them all to go, it's rather something of
an impulse brought about by their discussion. I have Damien leading the way to
the cave, in a great effort to prove that there isn't a cave, and that this is
all bull shit. Some of this can be addressed by the caretaker explaining their
policies regarding deaths. However implausible it may be, the caretaker should
give reason for these plot holes. So the plotholes will be covered by the
caretaker. I like that.)

Damien reads the letter. In order to escape the conversation with Susan,
Kimberly goes back inside, and asks what is holding Damien up. Damien shows
Kimberly the letter, and she reads it. Kimberly expresses her curiosity at the
whole thing, but Damien regards it as having some natural explanation. Kimberly
says they should tell Susan and Michael about the letter, and Damien is
oppossed, but in a disinterested way, like "it's all not true anyway, so I
don't see any point, but if you want to then okay." Upon reading the letter,
Susan begins to go off on how this has to be the work of the devil, and wishes
to burn it. At this, Damien gets furious, and demands to go and find the place
where the cave should be to prove that there is no cave there. Kimberly, who
wanted to explore anyway, decides to stay by him, and Susan, who is still
vehemently opposed, is eventually convinced my Michael to follow them.

They arrive at the point, and don't find the cave at first, but when all four
of them arrive, Kimberly ends up finding the opening. It was somewhere they
thought they had checked, but it didn't appear until all four of them were
there. They go in.

The awakening.

They all exit the cave and begin discussion. When they try and find the cave
again, they can't find it. They all four talk about their course of action.

(Something I just thought about with the tale of the hermit, is that the god
does not know why some are saved and some are not, but he finds that those that
are tend to more greatly understand the truth about the world. One of those
truths is the flat earth. This greatly determines their course of action)

From here, things get a little more blurry to me, so I will try to speak out
what happens as best I can. Susan and Michael have vastly different opinions
about what to make of all of this. I know that Susan has a seizure, and Michael
kills himself in order to find Susan and save her. Damien is killed in
discovering the truth about flat earth. Kimberly receives a vision in her
dreams from Brett, telling her to place the documents in a time capsule, along
with a new symbol, that he is not sure what it means. Kimberly dies driving
away from that point.

I want there to be something indicating that the message of flat earth gets out
there. In other words, I want the notion that he is killed, but not before he
can get the message out.

I've discovered a lot, especially about the beginning. I'm not sure how the
ending goes quite yet, but I have a lot of good dialog for the beginning.

