# 20180715 Effects of the coffee - Musings on Government
So yesterday was an interesting day for me. The whole, let's drink a bunch of
coffee thing allowed me to focus in on and create the above article like I did,
which I have not as yet read back to myself yet, but after that it left me in
quite a strange state. I started reading Dante's inferno, the translation I got
from the store just yesterday, and I read the whole introduction as one does
(or rather as I do) when in such a cafinated state, with supreme haste, but
focus, all at the same time, and I think I even continued to drink some more as
I was reading it. Eventually, however, I got to the point where I quickly began
to realize that, maybe drinking a half a gallon of coffee is too much for one
day, and it was becoming five o clock and six o clock and I was still finishing
the last of my last cup for the day, and eventually I elected to make a
smoothie, the kale smoothies that I have been making as late, and I made that
smoothie, and continued to drink the coffee, and I began to discover what
people talk of when they talk of coffee making their stomach uneasy, because in
that time my stomach was becoming quite uneasy, and I was still having my out
of body sort of experinces that I have when I drink coffee, and all the rest,
and I began to come about my inclination towards coffee. I remember thinking
"wow, this is what alcoholics must feel when they say to themselves 'I'm never
drinking again' and then the next day they do" because I had the inclination
like I had gained quite a lot from the consumption of the coffee, and during
the whole high of that stimulant, I remember thinking "I wonder if I could do
this both Saturday and Sunday and not have to worry about dependence." but then
later in that day I was thinking "I am never drinking coffee again" in a sort
of tongue in cheek sort of way. And lo and behold, I tell you, when I finally
did get to sleep, at around 2, and I had a dreamless sleep, I woke up around
11, and not soon after that I was thinking about how a cup of coffee, to put
myself into the focused state of yesterday would be nice, and I immediately
shurgged at myself for having forseen this entire thing, so I elected rather
just to do the things that I wanted the coffee to give me focus on, rather than
releing on the coffee to give me that crutch, and I continued to read some
Hamlet. I will say though, the out of body feeling that coffee gives persisted
today, and I still felt the after effects of the substance in my body, so
coffee is indeed quite the drug, and it's amazing to me that so many people
will indulge themselves to it without knowledge of it effects on their body.
What un-enlightened lives we all lead.

Regardless, I don't want to dwell on coffee or substance or anything of that
sort. Today, I have the strangest inclination, for whatever reason, to talk
about the concepts of government. I don't know what compells me to speak so,
because quite frankly I don't really have any particular thoughts that I find I
have to get out on paper, but I feel like writing about it none-the-less, and
so that is what I will do.

So to start I think, I want to take two angles. The second angle I want to take
will have to do with staring at the very root of it, and discovering in a way a
sort of evolutionary line of government that could have taken place from the
history of our evolution from monkey people to wandering nomadic tribes people
to agrigultural farmers to the city state structure we have today. However,
before I do that, I have a few comments about terms that I think have taken a
sort of meaning of their own that is entirely apart from the meaning they were
originally etymologized from. (Is that a word? I don't care) So here it goes.

The most common terms you will hear in our system of government, here in
America, are the terms Democrat and Republican. And I think a lot of people
have the notion that these terms refer to peoples stance on some current issues
today. So, for example Democrats will be pro-choice while republicans will be
pro-life, and democrats will be pro-gay marraige, and republicans will be
pro-marriage as an institution of god, and etc etc with other such issues,
things like illegal immigration, forigen policy, and etc etc. However, when one
looks at the roots of these words, a very different sort of notion of what one
is in relation to the other appears.

A democrat would be one who is a proponent of democracy, one that believes that
the popular vote of the people should determine where our policies should go.
Within this sphere of democrats there could be different sub-sections that have
to do with those that believe in each voice having equal weight, those that
feel different groups should have equal weight, and also the concept of to what
extent this should be taken. For example, I think most would agree that
startegic choices taken in war time should not go to the popular vote of the
citizens of the people, but there might be some who would argue for such a
thing as well. Such an argument is sort of silly in my mind, although I could
see how it could be attractive to some who don't look deeply into such things.
For instance, you could say "perhaps the soldiers who are storming a facility
disagree on a direct approach, or a stealthy approach, and if they disagree,
perhaps they should take a popular vote amongst themselves to decide which way
they should go upon." Indeed, that would be one way to settle that
disagreement, but such a stategem is clearly not the ideal scenario, and those
that have better systems in place would out maneuver and thus bring about the
"survival of the fittest" or rather, "death to the unfit" in that system.
However, when it comes to policies such as "should women be allowed to abort
their unborn fetuses." such an issue some believe should go to the popular vote
of all those who are involved in such a thing, and it's not nearly as clear
whether this is an appropiate way of governing.

Now, in this way I am showing my bias here, as I feel the popular vote of the
people should never have divine power. Certainly, the voice of the masses will
have some effect of what actually plays out in the world, but the concept that
democracy is some sort of gold standard that any free society should strive to
(and in this sentence alone we have so many vague concepts that are so ill
defined by many), that is absurd. I digress on my topic a bit, because the
government of democracy has it's place in certain aspects, but even in those I
feel that it is ill suited and less than ideal a system of government.

Alas, when I start talking about these things, I always feel the need to define
the terms I use, and in this one is no different. Because in talking of
government, I still haven't even defined what a government is. Of course, in
this day and age, we associate the word "Government" with "the instiution of
elected and appointed officials of the American government put in place by the
constitution of the United States" or some other such anagolous definition, but
that falls short of what I mean when I say government. Surely that falls within
the concept of "something that Governs" which is what the dictionary would have
to say about government, but "our government" is only one instance of what a
government could be. So let's stop beating the bush and get to what I mean when
I say government.

When I saw government, what I mean is this. A government is a way of organizing
any group of smaller sub-units into a larger unit, usually with some aim in
mind. The nature of that aim varies by the system of government that is being
applied, but the concept of organizing a group of sub-units into a bigger unit,
and the methods and application of doing so, is what I mean when I say
government. So, for instance, in order to illustrate some distinctions here, I
want to make an example. Suppose a man wholly undisciplined is fat and out of
shape, but he decides to pull himself together, sticks to a diet, applies a
workout regiment, and loses weight. The losing weight is not the government,
that is the aim of the government. Also, the diet and the exercise regiment,
those thing are also not the government, those would be the policies that his
government has enactted, although to blur the distinction at this level would
not be a very large folly. The government of this man, rather, is that which
"pulls him into shape" in this way. It wolud be his brain, the neurons that
fire, that put together all of the things, all of the policies and aims and all
of that, to get up off the couch and into the gym.

A tyranical government, in this sense, would be if this man would say to
himself, "Jim, you are fat, you are ugly, and I don't care about any of your
fleshly desires, this is what we are doing and you have no say in the matter"
and in such a way he would force himself to go against his will and enact a
diet.

You can also imagine a purely democratic government, which is coincidentally
(the kind of co-incidence that is co-generated) the kind of government that I
think a lot of people take when it comes to their every day activities. A
person enacting a democratic government would say this, "Well, part of me wants
to lay on the couch, and part of me wants to work out, and part of me wants to
get up and eat more food, and part of me wants to call be friend and see if he
wants to go to the bar, so I'm going to take a vote and see which one wins" and
in this way this man could govern himself. Now, this man could be in such a
forturate position as to me the sort of person that likes to workout and that
portion of him always wins, but if he is not such a person, and indeed in our
luxiourous life style that we live here in america, most people are not, that
portion of him will not win, and instead he will get up and get more food and
eat that food, and so doing he will give in to his basest of desires. Such a
lifestyle border-lines on hedonism, but hedonism is slightly different, and
something that I could get into but feel would be too tangent to the discussion
at hand.

Something I want to make note of as well is, every government will have some
sort of all of these concepts imbued within them. There is no "purely
tyranical" government, as the voice of the people, no matter how fierce or
clever the tyrant, will always in some way effect the actions of the tryant.

In fact, something also I want to say, is that all of these forms of
government are restricted by the laws of science in nature. A successful
dictator ship is dependent on mob psychology, and without that, and without
methods put in place to instill things such as fear of rebellion and quell
things such as independenth thought, such a government will not hold its own
for very long, and the dictator will not last.

So in that sense, we could say that anarchy is the most base form of
government. In fact, to call Anarchy a government would be like calling some
analogy that makes sense here. (I can't think of an appropiate analogy at the
time and don't want to dwell on it) What I am trying to get at is anarchy only
a relation to government in that it is the complete lack of government. It is
what happens when you let the sub-units each act on their own accord, and "let
the chips fall where they may".

And something I want to say at this point, democracy is only one step above
anarchy. Anarchy is like saying "Everyone has a voice, and the one's with the
loudest and strongest voices get to say what we do" where as Democracy is the
enforcment that "everyone has a voice, and we want to make sure that the weak
and little voices are enhanced and the strong and powerful voices are dampened,
so that all of the voices are equal". And you can see how much enforcment such
a thing must take.

Indeed, maybe that's the only difference between democracy and anarchy.
Democracy is simply anarchy without heirarchy. But that is much to harsh a
critcism to democracy (or maybe it is to much a praise of anarchy, although I
am more inclined to the former)

So enough on democracy, I wanted to get to more definitions, and I have gone
completely off on tangents about democracy. So lets talk about what it means to
be republican.

A republican, traditionally and etymologically speaking, is one that believes
that the policies put forth should be decided by those most knowledgeable about
the effects and implications of those policies, and in so doing, this panel of
experts will decide, each in their appropiate place, what our policies should
be.

So this system of government sound all well and dandy, and we can all agree
that having people knowledgeable of the implications of their action should be
the ones who are given the power to make those decisions, but there is one big
flaw with this system. That is, who gets to decide who is the expert on
something? And in that way, the republican system is so much more interesting
than the democratic one of "just give the people a voice and do what they say",
but this interestingness makes things difficult when there is such a large
group of people who all have different opinions about what "well-being" means.

And indeed, that comes to the crux of the issue as well. It's one thing on
deciding a system of government when all of the sub-unit's are agreed on what
the aim of the government should be, but when the sub-units are not in
agreement, how can one even begin to form a government which seeks to aim
towards an amorphous goal?

I think this is where the concepts of democracy and the concepts of the
republic can meet. The democracy can be used to determine "what is the aim of
our government" and the republic can say "this is the best means to acheive
that aim" and these two together can merge and we can all be great.

But this is a gross oversimplification, for a multitude of reasons. The first,
is that, even if some majority agree on a certain aim, the concept of "a
majority want this to be our aim, so that is our aim" is really quite
misguided. Why should it not be the experts who know "what the aim should be"
that get to decide our aim?

Going back to our example of the fat man, a majority of him, his fat cells, his
atrophied muscles, his stomach bacteria, all of those things say, "our aim is
for the increased consumption of sugary foods so that we might use them and
store more fat for ourselves", while only perhaps his tummy aches and
out-of-breathness he feels when he eats would be the only things saying "we
should seek to overcome our sedentary nature and strive to be more active". In
this way it is a majority that says that he should stay on the couch and keep
eating, and so if we allowed democracy to control our aim like that, this is
the downfall of it.

I am getting to a rambly point, and don't feel very inclined to continue on
this whole train of thought. Basically, where my thoughts take me is this. I
feel that democracy is a wholly inadequate system of government, and while the
concept of bringing things to a popular vote when many of the individual units
disagree on something is one way to resolve some of the most trivial of
policies, I feel that it fails on many levels and that there will always be a
better way of doing things.


