# 20180807
So last I had two dreams, the second of which I remember quite well so far
(although that could change as I write on) but the first I don't remember much
of at all. And the thing is, I feel like it will all come rushing back to me at
some point. I remember waking up after this dream, it was in the middle of the
night, I'm not sure what time, and coming up with some scene, a scene that
happened at the beginning of the dream, which I knew would trigger my memory of
the rest of the dream. THe thing is, I don't remember what that trigger was, I
don't remember what it is I told myself that I would remember. So as it is, I'm
left with a very breif recollection of the dream, and memory that I did come up
with a trigger. So let's get into it.

First I just want to say what it is I remember about the first dream. I do
remember that it ended on a golf course. Whether or not the entire dream was on
this golf course, I do not know. But I remember a bit of it, towards the end. I
was in the cart with some people who were playing golf, and they started
talking about the course. I remember them talking about the different holes,
and about the various hazards on each hole, and I remember saying something
like, "oh, I know this course, it's the one with the last hole that goes over
the street to the green." And I remember envisioning quite vividly in the dream
a vision of the last hole, where it goes over the road, and on teh other side
is a square area, uncannily square, that has the green on it. This golf course
I know I have had in other dreams, and the hole we were on at that point, the
point I said something, was one of the holes after the hole that goes by all of
the expensive houses. Actually, the one after that is a huge dogleg hole, then
the next hole, it's a par three that goes almost down into an extremely wooded
area. I am actually not sure which hole I said this on. The one thing I do
remember is that one of the players was a dream version of a girl, I think the
same dream girl that will come up in the next dream. Like I said, I feel like
there is way more to this dream that I am not remembering, and this dream I
remember having a more profound effect on me then the next one (which was still
a pretty profound dream) but I can't remember it. I think the golf course is
similar to the bowling range in a previous dream, it's just an object that my
mind placed there to "sheild me" from the real dream that happened. I could be
wrong. Anyway, on to the dream that I remember.

So I remember pretty early back into this dream. The first memory is of
organizing a plan of attack for a dream version of a house that doesn't exist
irl in a neighborhood that doesn't exist irl. It's hard to say where exactly
these places are, but definitely they are north west in dream directions from
my parents house. The house is nothing particularly special, it is on a hill,
like most house are, but this hill is a little more pronounced, to the point
where you are noticably going up a slope to get to the front door of the house.
The inside of the house, it has a main living room right as you enter from the
front, then to the left there is a breakfast area, and beyond that, and blocked
off from the living area is a kitchen. In the living area, I remember there
being a couch, with a TV. Out towards the back there is an area that goes down,
and then there is the exit to the backyard. I don't really know what the
backyard is like. So the dream started and I was at my parents place making
plans for how we were going to clean this house when we got there. So I put
away my plans and I make my way to the house. I don't remember driving there
very much, in fact, I don't really think I drove, but I think I just exited my
parents place, and I was in that neighborhood. So I remember walking in to that
house, and seeing Granny and Kyle sitting on the couch watching some TV, and
Papa and Dad were in the kitchen area, and everyone was sort of lingering as if
they were waiting for me to get started. So I make my entrance, and then I go
outside, and head towards the lawnmower. I remember I had the plan all laid out
in my head, and I wanted to begin to explain the plan to everyone, when Kyle
interjected and started giving his plan. I was about to inturrupt him, and tell
him that I had the plan figured out and that I didn't need him, but before I
did so, I realized that the plan he was giving was exactly like the plan I had,
so I let him finish explaining his plan, but I had started a watch the entire
time. Now that I think abuot it, I started the watch to time how long he would
go on about the plan, I gave myself a buffer before I would inturrupt him.
Something like, "I'll let him speak for two minutes, and then I'll inturrupt
him," but when I realized that he was explaining the same plan as mine, I just
left the watch running, and let him explain the plan. Well, he went on in a
rambly sort of way, and I remember looking to my dad, who was ready to just get
on with what we needed to do, and I sort of looked at him like, "Well, yeah, I
was going to explain the plan myself, but I have decided to let Kyle explain
it." When Kyle was finally wrapping up what he wanted to say, I checked the
watch, and at first I thought it said fifty minutes, and I told this to my dad
and he was appalled a bit, but then I realized that I had the watch upside
down, and that really it was twenty minutes, but as I tried to explain this my
dad didn't care, and I thought, "eh, it was still a long time to explain
something that should have taken only a few minutes." At that, I then went to
the mower. This entire time, we were in the front right corner of the house,
where the mower was sitting, and my portion of the plan was to start with
mowing the lawn. I remember there was something about the gas in the mower, but
that was before this whole thing with the plan. I think maybe I just made sure
that the mower was full, and I put some gas in the tank, but I remember it
being a sort of open canister, and when I put gas in I could see it quite
clearly in the tank sloshing around everything. Like, the gas was just in the
mower, a part of all the aspects of the mower, as if the internals of the mower
were submerged in the gasoline, and it operated in a gasoline environment like
that. This is absurd, obviously, but it's what I remember. Anyway, that was
earlier in the dream, and now it was time to start the mower and begin mowing.
So I started it, and before I could finish even half of the first pass of the
yard, at that point is when the dream took a pretty dramatic shift.

The shift was so dramatic that I feel like I have to start a new paragraph. So
I am not entirely sure I remember exactly what was going on here, but at this
point, I remember hearing some screams, the screams of two women bickering and
fighting over something, and so I left the mower where it was, and I went
inside. At this point it was dusk, turning to night, as well, in the dream,
where as before it was the afternoon. So I went inside, and the inside of the
house was quite different now. The lay out was somewhat similar, but it was not
nearly as compact, and there were more rooms. THere was a stairway right at the
start, but I don't know what upstairs is like, and then the breakfast area and
kitchen were on the left of these stairs, and on the right there was a lot of
different rooms for living area. It will become relevent later. Regardless, I
remember going in because I heard these two girls bickering, and one of them
had actually died, and the other was going outside. The one girl had not killed
the girl, but instead, the girl died of hysterics more. They were fighting over
a man, and this fighting caused the girl to die. The other girl was storming
outside. This point of the dream I'm a little sketchy on, but she was going
outside to address some people out there, whether they were media, which
doesn't seem quite right, or police, which also doesn't seem quite right, she
was going out, but I remember saying to her, that out and to the left was the
direction that she was expected to go, but then she said that, since the other
girl died, things have become a lot more complicated, and now right is the
direction to go. She said something about balance, how the other girl was
supposed to go to the right, but now that she was dead, it was her
responsibility to go to the right. Something like that. I didn't understand,
but it made sense to me, so I let it go. I then remember, after walking
outside, and it was fully night now, I went back in, and there it was that I
met Joe Rogan. Joe Rogan was doing a podcast, and I walked in in the middle of
it. He was talking with one of the comedians, Duncan Trussel, and he had
inturrupted his podcast, although it was still airing, but he had inturrupted
his conversation with Trussel to talk about these girls. When I came back in,
he was excited, and he took me in to the other room, and he wanted to talk to
me about the entire thing. I remember him saying something like, "Isn't this
whole thing insane, it's nuts that two girls will fight over something like
this, and now one of them is dead, that's insane," something like that, and I
remember telling myself (and this is a common theme for the rest of the dream)
to be cool, and not be star struck about Joe Rogan, but just be cool, and I
came up with something to say that seemed somewhat profound to me, but I
thought it would get me in Rogan's good graces. I said, "Well, it just goes to
show that mental anguish can be just as powerful as physical disease, the
effects of it can be similar." Something like that. I remember Joe's reaction,
he said something like, "Yeah, yeah, totally," and I was happy, because I had
gotten the impression that I was getting Joe's approval. I even remember in
that moment thinking, "If I impress him enough, he might even invite me to be
the main guest on his podcast." But then, I didn't have anything more to say to
that profound thought. It just sort of hang there, and it was silent for a good
ten seconds. I thought about trying to break the silence, but I didn't have
anything more to add to that thought, and I tried to conjure up something more
to say, but I couldn't come up with it, so it sort of hung there, until Joe
broke the silence. He mentioned that he wanted to show me a Jiu Jitsu move, and
I said yeah, I would love to talk about that, so he got me in his closed guard,
but he proceeded to 

Holy shit i remember the first dream. It was in the mountians, and I was
robbed. I was captured by hooligans. They called Nick. The leader of them was
very tall. The golf course was a foil, it has nothing to do with the dream.

Anyway, let me finish up the first dream. So Joe had me in closed guard, and he
turned around to his stomach and his top leg he placed it against my chest, and
he said something like, "I used to think this position was bad, but after
developing it, I have come to like it, you think you can take my back, but you
can't, try" so I tried to take his back, and his leg was indeed in the way. I
remember also Joe being belly down, I could see his ass, and his entire back,
and it was extremely sculpted, is teh only way to put it. He was sort of naked
now, but only in the sense that when I looked at him I saw him naked, not in
the sense that "I was undressing him with my eyes" but in the sense that when I
looked at him he was naked, but in the dream he was not naked. Anyway, after he
showed me this, a girl walked in. At this point, I have failed to mention the
setup. So on the other side of the stairs, was Trussel. At some point in the
dream, I think this was when we were talking about the girls, I remember joe
saying, "I want that jacket" refereing to Trussel's jacket, and he left the
room he was talking to me in, and went into the other room and got the jacket
from Trussel, who was still entertaining the podcast viewers on his own, and
then Joe came back wearing the jacket. I remember thinking, "Oh, he is Joe, I
suppose he can do that." When he was out, I investigated the room we were in.
It was a pretty empty room, there was a spot in the back corner where Joe
started sitting at first, with a chair and table, but what I noticed most about
the room was that there were cameras all over, and they had an uncanny ability
to track everything movement I made. They got every angle, and they tracked the
movements of my face. I remember thinking, "this makes sense, Joe does his
podcast professionally" and that was that. Anyway, back to where we were. This
girl walks in, and thinking on it after I woke up, I started to realize this
was the girl that had gone outside. Well, whatever had gone on outside she was
done with, and she was ready to come back in and continue talking with us. So
she comes back in, and we started talking about the situation a bit, but she
sort of shrugged it off, not in a "I don't want to talk about it" sort of way,
but more of a "There's not much more to talk about" sort of way. As if there
were legitimately not much more to talk about. Like, it wasn't that she was
avoiding talking about it, it's just taht there was legitamately not much more
to talk about. So we started talking about other things, and this girl started
talking about these group sex things that she would do. She talked about like
this, but she mentioned how they are running out of guys. She then turned to
me, and said, "But you seem like a good guy for it, you can use that penis
right?" and to that I got a little nervous, and decided very much not to tell
her I was a virgin, but instead said something like, "Yeah, my penis is nice,
and I know how to use it." And she said, "Good, you should come to us and have
some group sex some time, we could use someone like you for it." and I said
that that sounded great. At this moment, I remember this being one of those
things where people say, "We should do something sometime," but it never
happens, and they just say it in that way to make conversation, and I felt that
this girl was doing that to me now, but I only got that impression slightly,
and I thought maybe they really would have me there. So at that point in the
conversation, Joe and the girl, who I was inbetween the two of them now, and we
were lying down somewhat intamately, they started talking about penises, and my
penis in particular. She started inquiring about my penis. And all of this was
just the natural flow of the conversation, it was just conversation, there
wasn't anything strange about it. And then I remember being directly asked
about some aspects of my penis directly. They were talking about how some
penises have veins, and others have some weird growths, and they were asking
about the features of my penis. And at that point I started to try and describe
my penis, but eventually I said, "It would be easier if I just showed you." So
I took my extremely erect, and very large, unusually large penis, out, and
started to show them what they were asking, but pretty quickly, Joe told me to
put it away because we were on live air. I then put it away, and apologized,
mentioning that I forget that we were live, and Joe immediately stood up, and
strated ordering people there around, production and such, saying things like,
"We can't have a penis on live air, that would be bad, the world isn't ready
for that, can we get it off" in a sterotypical angry director sort of way. I
then remember, as the girl and I were leaving, I talked to a kid there, and I
said, "How bad is it?" and the kid said, "We can get it off of the broadcast,
but everyone who was live saw it." I then said okay, thank you, and the girl
and I began walking out together. As we walked out, we walked out into yet a
different scene, a totally different outside then the one before, and I
remember saying something like, "God damn it, I blew it" and she said "Blew
what" and I said, "That was my chance to get in with Joe Rogan but I showed my
penis on live air, that's essentially ruined my chances." and she said "Oh come
on, it will be okay, Joe isn't upset, he's not mad at you, it was just a
mistake, it will be okay." and I said, "I know Joe isn't upset, but he
certainly won't have me on his podcast again after that." And the girl just
tried to comfort me. As we were walking, we also ran across John Oliver, who
was getting into a big SUV thing, and I stopped and said, "Oh, John," and I
remember thinking here also "Be cool Brett," but then I thought, "this is
something you would say to anyone you meet," so I proceeded to shake his hand
and say, "It was very nice to meet you John." and John shook my hand out and
said, "Okay," before getting back into the SUV. I remember thinking, "Oh, he
probably doesn't remember that we met at all (and we didn't meet in the dream,
even though I felt like we had). Well, the girl and I were about to part ways,
and as we were going our different ways, I said, "Hey, do you want to exchange
numbers?" and the girl looked over to me as she was walking and just said, "No,
I don't think I do" and I said, "okay, that's fair," and we walked on our
different ways. I then remember thinking, "that's the first time I've been
rejected my a girl, okay, that's good, it feels awful but that's good. And I'm
glad, because that sort of girl is not the sort of girl that would be attracted
to me, she was very honest" So I kept walking on, and the dream ended as I was
walking through the hallway, in a hallway that was similar to the one where we
used to take piano.

Okay, so that dream took a long time to recall, and this other dream, I love
this dream a lot more, and I will surely spend a lot more time talking about
this dream, but I have an issue, and that is that there is work that is to be
done, and I haven't started on any of it yet. I really want to talk about this
dream. I have time before Jiu-Jitsu to get it done, it will just take time.

So the dream starts on a path through the mountains. These mountains are
similar to the mountians on the way to colorado in dream versions that I have
had before. Actually, there was a dream that I remember where I was going
between different areas on the map, from Colorado to Seattle. But there is no
good geographic location to describe where I was. Anyway, in this dream, I was
walknig through this path with Avi, and he and I were just going on teh path,
talking about things. I were sort of catching up, and sort of just talking
about whatever, and we got to a certain point on the path, and he said, "I am
going to turn back now.

I have a problem now, because Caitlin is going to be testing next to me, and I
don't want the typing to be so loud that she makes a point of talking to me
about it. I have a strong feeling that she will notice. I think I can do this,
I just have to be soft. I will forget, but I will do my best.

So I say that I want to keep going, but Avi says that it's not the best idea,
and that I should probably go back, but if I do keep going, just be careful and
aware of yourself. At this point, the danger is simply the fact that the path
and the mountains have become more treacherous, and I wanted to keep going
along the path. So I say that I want to keep going, and Avi says he is turning
back, so at this point we part ways. I don't remember if we shared a hug, but
if we did it was breif, and I went up the path at this point. At this point, to
the right of the path was a long fall off a cliff, and directly in front of the
path was a big rise to trees, and the path continued by climbing up to the
left, through the trees. Once you climb up, the path went down and around this
frontward roadblock, and so I kept going. I went along this way for a good
while, until I came to a sort of urban/rural area. There was a roadblock
between the path and the rural area. It was a small area. To the left, there
was a building, almost like an electricity plant, straight ahead, it was
foresty and rural, I don't know what was straight ahead exactly, but to the
right there was a small park area with a big gazebo area inside of it. I
remember getting to this road block, and approaching this urban area, and I
placed my wallet and phone and keys near the roadblock, and I stood there,
looking around. I took in the scene for a good time here, like this, and I
remember looking around and thinking, "this is the kind of area where vagabonds
might live." although I didn't think about it explicitely like that, but
instead it was just sort of the idea in my head. Well, as I started thinking
about it, I noticed from around the corner of the plant, there were four people
coming. They were just sort of meandering along, and when they came across me,
they took interest. More, they noticed that I had left my wallet and phone and
keys and pen on the ground, and they started rushing at me for it. I remember
thinking at this point, "I should just run, leave the things and run." but as I
ran past my things, I couldn't help but reach down and pick them up. The guys
were able to come up and say, "stop there" and they overtook me and surrounded
me. I had the things there, and there was definetly one, taller then the rest,
he was very tall, over seven feet tall if I had to give him a height, who
stopped me, and who was clearly the leader of the group. He told me to stop,
and started being physical with me. I stood my ground though and said, "What do
you want from me?" and the leader said, "We want that wallet and phone, you
think you can just take things from us without us noticing." At this point, I
understood that they thought I had seen the wallet and phone, and taht I was
able to steal it before they could, so I tried to clarify. "No these are my
things, if you want to steal them from me, you can take them, but I did not
steal them, they are mine." At this the leader was skeptical and said, "Really,
if they are yours, then prove it." And he took them from me, and sent me off to
the gazebo area, where there were a lot more of the underlings. The leader then
went through the contacts of my phone, and called someone, and with the line
open, he walked up to me and said, "If this is your phone, then I have called
your boss, you should be able to talk to him if this really is yours." And I
said, "You called Nick Dillon" and he said yes. I thought at that moment "why
of all people would you call my boss of all people, why didn't you call my mom
instead, but I picked up, and started talking with Nick. I don't remember
exactly the conversation, but I remember being at a loss for words, and Nick on
the other line said, "Is this the situation we talked about, with the
vagabonds?" and I was very relieved that Nick knew what was up, and I said,
"Yes, it is," and Nick replied, "Okay, I will call the police, they will be
there, just try and survive, you can't defend yourself on your own no matter
how badass you think you are." That ended the conversation. At this point, the
vagabonds were satisfied that they were my things, but I knew that just leaving
the scene with my things would go badly. I started thinking at this point. If
they attack me, I need to go for their leader. The leader, like I said, was
very tall, but I reasoned, I have fought tall people before in Jiu Jitsu, and I
should at least be able to protect myself and hold my own against him if things
get physical. Well, as the scene continued, and tensions continued to rise, I
remember noticing the leader very much posing and being threatening to me, and
I remember thinking, "there might be weapons," and I thought that that would be
very bad, but I knew that the way to handle the situation was to be firm in
myself, not to cower down to him, but to be firm. The leader kept imposing
himself, making himself big, and generally being threatening to me, but I was
firm, but I was unsure if things would escalate. I forget exactly how this
dream ended, but it was pretty soon here. I remember thinking about the cops,
and how they were on the way, but how I didn't want them to come. I also
remember when asked about weapons, I mentioned only the pen I keep in my
pocket. Eventually, I think, when the leader realized that I wasn't cowering to
his posturing, I was given the opportunity to leave, and even then I felt
strange doing so. I forget how the dream ended, but I remember walking away at
some point. I think it ended with me standing up to the posturing, and him
saying something like, "you're not scared are you" and with my firmness I
answered his question, and he said "fine" and then I walked off, and that's how
the dream ended. Something like that. I was just barely walking off when the
dream ended.
