# 20180708 Dream: Pregnancy and the adjudcator - Preamble to my father
So today I had a most vivid and most unsettling dream, that surely indicates
the guilt I am feeling at neglecting my work duties. The dream took place in a
hotel. I have had other dreams in this hotel before, but the description of the
hotel is largly irrelevent. The dream started with me challenging people to a
sort of game. The game went like this. There was a bunch of ice on a counter,
and the goal of the game was to collect all of the ice and transfer it from the
counter and into a bucket without getting any on the floor. It's a rather
simple game, and the only sort of game that would make sense to play in a
dream. Obviously (to my waking self, and later to my dream self) the way to win
this game is to pick up the bucket, place it  on the side of the counter, and
use your other arm to corale the ice so that it falls in the bucket. Now, at
this point I need to mention an important detail about this game. I was only
challenging pregnant people to play this game. And I say pregnant people,
because there were two people I remember I challenged to this game. First was
Cara, the receptionist at work. Now when she played the game, I remember
looking on with a sort of curiosity, as she would scrape the ice off of the
counter and into her other hand, and then she would try to get the ice from her
hand into the bucket, but she lost a lot of ice to the floor in doing so, which
was the nature of the challenge. Now there was no rule that you couldn't pick
up the bucket, but to my dream self, and to the people of the dream, that step
wasn't entirely obvious. So I watched Cara do this, and I remember feeling a
bit embarrassed for her, as she was clearly extremely pregnant while doing
this, and her handicap was noticably hindering her. I didn't think much of
this. Then I remember challenging another person to the game. This person was a
pregnant man. Now, I don't know what that means in the context of this dream.
In fact, I remember after he played the game, I was talking with my brother
Kyle about the whole thing, and mocking him a bit. I remember saying something
like "I don't know if he's a chick that identifies as a dude and got pregnant
anyway, or if he's somehow like that Arnold Schartzenegger in that movie that I
know he got pregnant in, I don't really know." If I can give a breif
description of him, he had short hair for a girl but long hair for a guy, he
was probably in his late thirties or early forties, and he took the fact that
he was pregnant as something that was completely normal. I will also note that
while he did have a noticable tummy, he was not very pregnant, only pregnant
enough for it to be visible, and for him to be a candidate for this game that I
was playing. Well, after he finished up the game, and spilled a bunch of ice on
the floor like Cara did, and he went off into another room of the hotel, a room
where there were other people who were socializing, that I think I had come
from previously in the dream but I forgot about that section of the dream, I
was talking with Kyle about the whole thing. And as I was talking with Kyle, I
started to mock in a sort of way the pregnant people who were failing at this
game. I picked up the bucket and said something like "look how easy this is"
and I scraped all of the ice with my left forearm from the counter and funneled
it into the bucket, and got all of the ice in the bucket in just a couple of
scoops. I then remarked something like "it's so easy but these people don't
think to do it, they just go on with their ways and then move on" (which indeed
is how a lot of people treat puzzles and such when they don't discover the
solution to them right away). I think I also made some comment about their
pregnancy as well (lately, in real life, I have made the observation that there
is nothing less attractive than a pregnant woman. Indeed, it is extremely
repulsive to me, like disgustingly so, and I have been surrounded by so many
pregnant women lately that it makes me want to vomit sometimes. But that's
another topic for another writing session). As I was mocking in this way,
almost stunned that none of the people that played this game could figure out
so simple a solution, and Kyle is just sorta standing there being the receiver
of this without providing input, my mom walks up to me and tells me that I
shouldn't mock these women in this way, and that not everyone is as smart as I
am. At this, I said something like, "Well, I'm not mocking them to make fun of
them, I only discovered this solution after seeing the game and then getting
a night of sleep, but I find it fascinating none the less that the solution is
so obvious but people continue to try and solve this puzzle the hard way
without aiming to find a better one." And I tell you that fascination was more
the feeling that I felt there much more than ridicule, and while I certainly
was ridiculing a touch these people, and putting them into the box of
"disgusting pregnant folk", I was more fascinated by this whole game and I
wanted to share just how simple the game really was, and I was intrigued that
none of the pregnant people had found a solution. In this dream there was no
control either (this didn't come up in the dream, but just in my observation of
it awake now) so whose to say if I asked someone who wasn't pregnant how they
would have faired. Regardless, after replying to my mom like so, she then asked
Kyle if we could have a moment, and she then came to talk to me. This is when
the tone of the dream shifted from this game to my work habits. After Kyle has
escaped into the other room to socialize with the others, my mom asked me about
my writing and journal habits, if I saved them on the work computer or if I
saved them on Github. I then replied that I saved them on github, and that
while the work computer was where I would sometimes write on them, everything
was stored on github and that was the place where my journal was kept. Then she
said something like, "well, you might want to reconsider that", mentioning
also something about how everything done on a work machine could be taken as
work property. I then continued to justify myself, saying that all of my
documents were stored on Github and not on my work machine, and that I could
wipe entirely from my work machine the documents and they would still exist on
github, so I wasn't technically using my work machine to write my jounals but
instead I was using github to store them. She just mentioned that I should be
very careful with what I am doing, and that I shouldn't be so carefree when it
comes to handling these sorts of issues, and went off, not into the other room
where people were socializing, but instead back, out of the hotel room entirely
and into the main hallway that leads to a sort of mutual area (similar to the
mutual areas on the upper floors of the res-hall). I did not follow her
immediately, but instead went to pick up the ice that had been spilled on the
floor as a result of this pregnant man playing the game. I rememeber being
introspective in this moment, thinking about the way I was mocking the people,
and I thought about how others might see my fascination with thier struggles as
rude, but at the same time I wasn't sure the best way to truely express my
fascination without coming off as rude, so I just kept picking up the ice, and
placed it all neatly on the counter where it belonged, not as an ice game but
as a regular bucket of ice, and I stepped to walk out of the room. As I was
walking out of the room, I remember looking to the left into the other room
where everyone was sociallizng, and I remember feeling a sort of feeling that I
get some time of isolation but then gratitude in my isolation, as I saw them
all socializing about I don't know what, and I thought about how I could have
entered there if I had wanted to, but decided to move along and find my own
path for that time. So I walked out of the room entirely, into the hallway, and
I made it to this mutual area, feel quite light and jolly about life, not in a
hop and skip sort of way, but in the sort of way where I will walk with my head
level, slowly, just taking in everyone and everything with a childlike
facsnation, and in this state I walked into the mutual area, still being
contemplative about my mom's words that I shouldn't take things so lightly. And
as I walked in, a man, much bigger than me, and big in the sense that this dude
could have been a bouncer, came up to me and said, "Brett Webster, come with
me" and he grabbed me by the sleve started to drag me (not off of my feet,
because I was instinctually compelled to walk where he did because his grip
was quite strong, and he portrayed a very storng aura of authority), and right
as he made this move, I said something like "Woah there, don't I have rights? I
don't have to follow you or tell you anything, I have a choice in this matter"
(and this came up because it still haunts me to this day that I gave consent
to that police officer to search my car, and I will even rehearse now
alternatives to that scenario where I instead calmly but firmly insist that I
be on my way) and he simply replied "no you don't, now come with me." to which
I couldn't argue with his authority. As he took me off, he took me through the
common area, into a more public common area, and we had to weave in between
some tables, and I remember as we wove inbetween these tables, I took myself
and kind of swung between the chairs (that had people in them) on top of them
as if I was on paralell bars, just because that was easier and more fun than
weaving through them. So when we got to the table, he already had all of the
forms laid out, and said something like this. "I need you to sign these 401k
forms indicating the adjudication of your employment." Now that entire
statement is patently absurd, but since it was my dream authority self telling
me them, they made perfect sense to me, I was being fired from my job, and as I
thought through the whole statement, I remember thinking in the dream "I guess
401k refers to both the retirement plan and the status of employment, they must
use the same forms" and I remember being intrigued by that. I also remember
thinking "well wait, Nick said they gave Hayden ample warning before firing
him, am I not receiving the same treatment?" Well, right as he was coming to
these realiizations, my 6:20 alarm went off, the alarm I didn't know I had
right next to me (indeed, as I said before, yesterday was an interesting day,
that ended with me putting on some hearthstone tournament on youtube and
falling asleep to that), and I immediately woke up with the same sense of "well
shit" that I had in the dream at being fired, and I had to evalute "okay, am I
sure that it is Sunday? Yes, I am sure, and I still have my job and that entire
thing was a dream." Well I did go back to sleep after comforting myself in that
way. I know I had another dream involving Collin at the Jason's Deli dream
location that I have been to before, but I don't remember any details of that
dream, and I don't even remember if it was before or after the adjudicator
dream. However, this is great, because I know what the adjudicator looks like
in my psyche now, which is a great thing to know. Of course, the dream itself
is unsettling, as it indicates that the guilt I feel towards slacking and
abusing the rope we are given at Alliant has gotten to the point that I feel
guilty about it to the point where the adjudicator in my dreams is firing me
from my job, but quite honestly at this moment I am more excited at having met
the adjudicator than I am distressed at having such a dream. And that is only
true at this moment now, if you would have asked me as soon as I woke up to
explain the consequences of my dream, I would have certainly said that my
strongest feeling in that moment was the sort of deflation one feels when you
learn that you've been fired, followed immediatly (after firmly convincing
myself that I had not been fired and that I still had my job) by the
introspection of my actions at my workplace, and the realization that it has
gotten to the point that I am having dreams about the consequences of my lack
of productivity.

I will certainly come back later today to write more, I just don't know about
what yet, and at this moment I need to take a break.

So I was correct in that I would come back and write more today. I was
incorrect that I was going to be writing about a lot. I have just got back from
visiting my father at the hospital and my mother at the house. I have a lot to
talk about, but now is not the time. I pray for a dream tonight, whatever that
dream may be. If the dream does not come, at the very least I will have
something to write about, that is entirely certain. But not now. Not now. Now
is the time for meditation and rest.


