# 20180926
So it has been a while since I have wrote in here. That is for two reasons.

Getting the first reason out of the way, it's because I am a lazy piece of shit
and haven't bothered to write here, because it is hard, and I don't always have
things to say, and it's exhausting on my mind, and all of that jazz.

But the second reason, and the real reason, I would say, is because I have been
using my time at work to actually work, and I have been pleasently surprised in
the sort of way that makes me feel. My feelings of worthlessness and inadequecy
go down when I actually work during work hours, and I feel more fulfilled doing
so.

Now, this has only been for three days or so. It's also somwhat hypocritical of
me to write this right now, because the time is 11 o'clock and I am working
right now. But still, I think there is something to this. The power went out at
Alliant, and we were told to work from home, and so I feel I am partially
justified in doing this pursuits. Nick will email us at 2:30 or 3 about the
status of the power at Alliant, and by that point I will return. Testing night
is tonight, so I see this as, "I will do my nightly pursuits now, because
working from home without access to VPN is rather difficult. So that is the
plan.

The thing is, I just need to be disciplined in being able to do the things that
I want to do, the things that I have been doing during work hours, in the not
work hours. My Russian practice and learning has gone down quite a bit in the
past month or so, and I feel that this is because there is something going on
that prevents me from wanting to get to it. Similar to the way that writing
like this will hurt my brain, learning Russian dose something similar, just on
a much larger scale.

Two nights ago, though, I did have a dream, a dream that I want to write down.
I have just finished reading an excerpt from Jung's "A man and his symbols" and
this dream reminds me very much of a dream that is described in the book. So
here it goes.

THis dream starts in a mall. It is similar to the mall that exists in my dream
version of Houston. I am walking through the hallway of th emall, and I get to
a point of the mall that is a blank tile wall on the left. A man is behind a
counter, on a ladder, and he is putting up for display all of my discs. Rather,
not all of them, but the ones that are rather nasty. You see, when I was in
Seattle, I had a few discs that I would use to prepare food on, like PBJ and
things like that, and as a result of the fact that I didn't really take proper
care of them, they became a bit nasty. There are also some discs I have that
are just not very well taken care of, and they are cracked or concrete ridden
or otherwise maimed.

When I saw him doing this, my first thought was, "Oh, my mom must have gotten
hold of these discs and donated them, and by chance I am walking by the place
that they were donated."

So I walked by, and I addressed the man. He was a rather old man, let's say in
his 60's and he was the sort of man that you would think of as "The humble old
man that owns the booth in the mall." I much respectable old man. And I
stopped, and I asked him, "Hey, those are my discs, where did you get them
from?"

And he replied, "Oh, I am sorry if there is some confusion, but I acquired
these discs legitamately. I assure you I did not steal them from you. However,
I see you feel wronged, and if there is some way in my power that I could
compensate you, I would, but you see, this is the way of my business here."

At this point, I consented, because I aws more upset at my mom for finding
these and selling them without consulting me. The old man then said, "If you
play ulitmate, I have an employee inside that you might want to meet. You might
know him."

So I walk inside, to the right, into the shop that this outside booth is
associated with. It's a typical mall shop that you would expect, with things on
each wall to the side, and maybe some racks in the middle, and such. I walked
to the back counter, though, and met with the man there.

The back counter was elevated I think two steps up, and the counter came up to
my belly button after stepping up, but up to my necx from the base floor. I
walked up, and introduced myself to the man behind the counter, and I asid, "So
the man outside told me that you play ultimate, is that true?"

And the man said, "Yep, sure is." The man in the dream was conflated to a large
degree, my image of him was one of a simlpy enlarged man, as if someone took
the size setting on a photoshop photo and brought it to 130%. It was not that
he was tall, it was that he was enlarged.

We then got to talking, and I told him a bit about my history with Ultimate,
how I used to play but thta I don't play very much any more. He then talked
about it a bit. He said, "Yeah, I used to be a lot more serious, but I've
dialed it back a bit in the past couple of years. This job here has been a good
change of pace."

I then asked who he used to play for, and he mentioned his college team, (I
forget which team it was, it might have been OU but that could be wrong) I then
asked if he ever played for the Roughnecks, and he said, "Oh yeah, I played
with them for a bit, I had my time and left though, it wasn't all for me." I
asked him which year he played with them, and he was apprehensive to talk about
it.

At this point, I remember trying to brag to him about how "I knew people and
used to play with people who now play with the Roughnecks" but I felt somewhat
foolish, and he was clearly not particularly interested.

So yeah, that was the extent of the dream. I woke up thinking about the discs
in my closet, but I have yet to take them out. I am honestly not sure if I
still have the ones that are a mess, and I believe I cleaned most of the ones
that were repairable and threw away the ones that werenn't but it is possible
that I didn't. I will check right now.

So there was only one that was in what I will call, "Not ideal shape" but it
was fixed by a mere application of some soap and water, so it was not too bad.

Still, the whole point of the dream has something to do with my inferiority
complex. The person in the dream, the conflated Roughnecks player (who does not
correspond to any particular Roughnecks player in any one to one relation) is
significant to this complex.à
