# 20181026
So I had three dreams, two of which are more fragments.

We'll start with the most fragmented one.

In this dream, I went over to Chris's desk. His desk on the other side of the
wall, but the wall wasn't there. The wall that seperates my desk from the
conference room was not there, and from that vantage, he had a pretty good view
of my desk. He asked me, "Sometimes, I see you with your hands down, and you're
just reading. What are you doing when you do that?" To this I replied, "Oh, you
know, usually I'm just thinking about what needs to be done, or reading a case,
something like that." This was about the extent of the dream, and the
interpretation of it is rather clear.

The other dream fragment is, during my lunch break, I had looked up a place
that taught guided meditation. I decided I wanted to go and check it out and
see if it was something that I wanted to do. Now, the layout of the map and the
roads was not at all like the layout that it is irl, and I could attempt to
describe the layout, but I don't think it has much point. Or rather, I think
there might be something in it, but it would be too exhausting to write all of
that out. Suffice it to say, that this whole thing went from east to west, but
most of the roads when north to south.

So I went to this location. I parked, and I had to navigate a whole walking
area to get to this place. I walked in, and the scene was as such. After going
up the stairs, I entered the front door. The back side wall was on the left,
and there was a sitting area along this wall. On the left side wall, towards
the front, opposite the corner I walked in at, there was the entrance to the
room itself where the guided meditation took place. On the front wall, to the
right of where I walked in, was the desk. The desk was enlarged as things
become in my dreams. On the right and left side walls were the materials and
props that were to be used.

When I walked in, I was early, so I found a spot and sat down. I started
talking with another guy who was there. He said that he was here to try it out,
and was curious what it would be like. When it started to get closer to time
for class to start, this old man got up, and went to the counter, and asked the
lady at the front desk if he could have a free pass for his trial there. The
lady looked around, and found a slip of paper that represented a free trial,
and said "Sure, here you go," and handed him the pass, which he then
immeditatly redeemed and went in.

So next, I went up to the counter, and I said, "Hey, so I'm looking to try this
out for a day also, what sort of offer do you have?" And the lady said, "Oh,
I'm sorry we don't do that, but would you like to sign up? What's your name."

At this point, I remember being a little peeved, since the other guy was able
to get a free pass, but I understood that they didn't have unlimited free
passes. I was simply annoyed and a little insulted by the whole thing.

So I gave her my name, and she said, "Great, let me look you up," and she put
my name into your system, and said, "Oh, Brett, you used to have a subscription
with Bikram, why'd you stop that?" I said, "Oh, I didn't know you were
connected, it's unfortunate that I didn't hear about you guys when I still had
my Bikram subscription. Still, is there any way you could get me a free trial?
I just want to check out what this is about."

She said, "No, we don't do that, I'm just going to have to ask you to sign
here, and then we'll get you in." I looked at the papers she was showing me,
and I asked, "How much is this?" and she replied "it's 150 per month." At this
point I said, "Oh, it was only 100 a month with Bikram, I guess it's gone up."
She said, "we might be able to negotiate that."

Now at this point, I was getting annoyed, and I said, "Okay, I might be
interested in signing up if you let me try out your experience, but I'm not
signing that." She thought about it for a second, and said, "I'm not
comfortable letting you in to the class if you don't sign these papers. So then
I said, "Well, I guess that's it then, have a nice day."

And I remember thinking at this point as I was walking away, that I was doing a
very impressive display of a negotiating tactic, the classic, the fake
walkaway, but I was very much resolved on walking away. I thought, "Okay, if
she tries to stop me, and gives me a trial and a deal, I might be interested
still, but even then, I might still just walk away and leave whatever she has
to offer, because at this moment, I feel resolved to walk away."

So as I exited the room, outside at the bottom of the stairs, I saw Chuck,
Papa, and Dad. They were coming in to the next class, and they mistakenly
thought I was leaving the class before it. So they said, "Oh look, I told you
we would find him here, you interested in guided meditation now?" And I didn't
want to muddle up what had happened, and try and explain everything, so I just
said, "Yeah, well, whatever" and walked on. They sort of looked at me in a kind
of confused way, but I walked off.

As I was getting back to my car, I remember going through many lots and streets
and things of that sort, and I was getting quite lost to where my car was, but
I got to the point where I had to cross a street to the parking garage that my
car was parked in. At that point, the dream ended.

--

Sorry for not replying for so long. When I saw this, I read the essay and told
myself I would sleep on it before replying, and ended up sleeping many nights
on it before re-reading it.

So I will admit straight up that I have never been a fan of Lewis, even in my
adolecent years. In fact, I might even go so far to say that the disconcordance
with which Lewis makes his arguments was a contributing factor to my divergence
from Christian thinking.

The main reason is because Lewis usually makes his arguments like, "If you
suppose A then you must suppose B" but never goes very far to support his A
claim, and it's nearly universal that I disagree with that A claim.

And specific to this work, it seems to me be a very well thought out straw man
argument, effectively saying, "Complete moral relativism is absurd is a logical
fallacy, therefore there is an objective and absolute moral truth." There's a
whole chasm in the middle that is not being addressed.

That said, this essay is really great in that begs to be dissectted, and in
that disecction there is a lot that I know would lead to some very interesting
discussion.

