So last night I had a dream. This dream takes place in a similar place that I
have been to in previous dreams. This place is something of a rural town like
atmosphere. I forget what the dream was where I was here before, but
regardless, it's like a western sort of alley way, with a shopping place with
some stands and so forth.

So the dream starts, and we are in the restaurant area, and we hear outside
that there is a whole event going on about who can put on the best makeup. It's
something of a mandatory event, everyone has to praticipate, but there is no
penalty for doing poorly.

Regardless, my mom is super excited about the event. She grabs one of the
things of makeup, and she opens it up. It's the kind of makeup that they use to
put on their eyelids (I don't know what the name of it is) and my mom makes a
design in the base of the container, and when the design is done, she plops it
onto her face, and because of how she layed it out, the make up goes on her
face perfectly. So she is done with her part in the contribution.

Kyle is there to, and he is not so keen on doing this competition. I'm a little
more excited about it, and I at least want to give it a sarcastic shot. I
remember talking with Kyle a bit about it, and I remember him saying that he
just didn't want to do anything. I remember going through some of the things. I
was like, "You could totally go for some sort of spoof, you could totally
overdo it, and paint your face, and make it so that you are way overdone for
the competition." He was still not having it. I then told him that another
option was to do it very subtly. Like, how people on TV put on makeup just so
that the lighting makes them look softer and such. He still was not interested,
and ended up walking away.

At this point, we were sort of at the end of the whole stands and everything.
The place was very crowded, with lots of people walking around. After Kyle
walked away, I got to work on my submission. At first, I asked the MC if he
could instruct me how I would put on makeup if I were to do it seriously and
subtly, but I didn't get much instruction, and decided that instead I would do
it sarcastically.

So I ask for three colors, I ask for a deep tan, I ask for a purple, and I ask
for a black mascara. I also question about glitter, but think better of it.

So I see a woman walking by with way overdone makeup, and I decide that I am
going to use her as my sarcastic guide. She had a very fake tan, so I start
using the tan color and begin to apply it all over my face. The color is a lot
like paint, and I am using a paintbrush to apply to my face. As I am doing
this, I start to realize that the tan is a lot more like black face than it is
tan, but I continue on with it anyway. It's very splotchy, and I am doing a
very poor job at making this work well.

After I get to a point where I am okay with the blackface, I then grab a
purple, and start to apply it to my eyelids. I am having a rough time with
this.

There is honestly not much more to this dream, I'm pretty sure I wake up and
proceed to have a different dream pretty soon after this. But something I do
remember is that, as I was attempting to apply the purple to my eyelids, one
thing I made note of is the viscosity of the purple makeup. It was very much
like paint. The second thing to note is, as I was applying this, three girls
walked by, and they looked at me and scoffed, and made some comment to
themselves about how bad of a job I was doing. I mostly ignored them, but I do
remember that happening in the dream.

The next dream I had I don't remember the specifics of, but what I do remember
is that I was having the dream as I was going back and forth from my left to my
right side, and the first iteration of the dream, on my left side, eleven of
something happened, then when I switched to my right, nine of something else
happened, then seven when I switiched back, and then five, and then three. When
it was three was when I was about to wake up for real, but I don't remember
what the eleven or nine or seven or whatever of something was, I just remember
those numbers of something.
