# 20180817
So last night I went to visit my family. I am very much not in the mood for
writing right now, but these things I must get out.

So I went to visit my family. My dad, a few days ago, was discharged from the
hospital, and has been home since then. I, however, have been too busy stabbing
myself in the hand to visit them. Well, a few days ago, my mom texted me,
telling me that bassically everyone was going to be there, and asked me whether
or not I wanted to join. Of course I said I did, and that was that.

So yesterday, straight from work, I drove through the highway traffic to my
parents place. Traffic was obnoxious, but I made it just fine. Of course I did,
it would be silly if I didn't. Anyway, as soon as I got there, the topic of
"what the fuck did you do to your hand" came up. And well, I tried to say, "I
want to avoid telling the story twenty times like I have done at work," and I
tried to tell the story once at the beginning when everyone asked, but it
didn't seem to work that way, as well, people had individual questions for me
throughout the night. It seemed to be the main source of conversation through
the night.

Kyle got his shoulder operated on yesterday as well, and dad was having a low
grade fever. As soon as I got there, mom was in the back, trying to talk to a
bunch of different pharmacies to get a bunch of medications and such, and well,
she didn't hear the start of my story about how I stabbed myself in the hand,
and was of course wholly distraught at what I told her when she came in. She
then went back, and came in to hug me, and I had no idea what was going on, she
just hugged me and held me for a good minute. I stood there, and I knew, of
course, that something was up, but I just held her.

It's strange, I guess, because, well, I know I have an oedipus complex now,
rather, I have self diagnosed myself with such a thing, so I was apprehensive
to hold her. I don't know if she felt that or not. I mean, she must have,
because we held for a long time, and those sorts of things get sensed here.

Regardless, that is not what I wanted to talk about with this journal entry.

I suppose I will just keep going with the night though. Apparently, my dad had
a low grade fever, and was not feeling well, and since it was Friday evening,
it was nigh impossible to find some special medication that he would have to
take, or not take, or something, I don't know and I didn't pay attention to the
details. So my mom was all stressing out about where to get this medication at
which pharmacy and calling a bunch of different places, and so on and so on,
and she was in the middle of doing all of that when I came in and started
proclaiming of how I stabbed myself in the hand.

So what I remember is her saying something like, "I have to put Dad in a
bubble, and I have to put Evan in a bubble, and now I have to put you in a
bubble again to" and I said, "No, the ability to stab yourself in your hand is
one of the best parts of life, it's something that a man should have the
ability to do." Of course, no one found that particularly amusing, and I think
the general reaction was, "huh" by everyone there. Of course, conversation
continued as it does, and we went on to talk about this and that and whatever.

Well, after my mom gave me her long hug, she went and gave Jason a hug in the
kitchen, and I migrated my way to the kitchen just to hang out there. Jason was
making guacamole of all things, and opening up the avocados, and when my mom
said she intended to go out to the pharmacy, Jason said he would go with her,
using dad's car. They had taken it to get it inspected and it failed inspection
because the battery had run out and some of the tests were pending. So they
needed to drive it some number of miles so that those censors would reset.

Anyway, I cut the avocados and made the guacamole while they were gone, and
then after they got back we had dinner.

When they got back, mom took dad to bed, and they went to bed and everything,
and then we started having dinner.

While we were eating dinner, the car alarm of my dad's mercades kept going off,
and we weren't sure why. Jason had the fob, and he could turn off the alarm
whenever we wanted, but still, it was the thing like, "why the fuck is this
happening." But we ate dinner, and towards the end of the night, we started
doing some research as to why the alarm might continue to go off at regular
intervals like it was, and we had no clue, and didn't find anything helpful,
but Jason and I ended up going outside to investigate.

We went out, and used the voltmeter to check the voltage of the batteries,
event though it wouldn't make sense that the battery voltage would cause the
alarm to go off, but we checked them anyway. We ended up getting out the
special sensor thing that goes with the Mercades, and we plugged that shit in
and ran diagnostics, and well, we didn't learn anything really from that except
that the diagnostics that failed for not available duing the inspection showed
not available on our tool as well, so that was nice.

Anyway, after we finished with that, and people were getting their way to bed,
Jason and I started talking in the kitchen.

We went through a few things. Quorom is being sold again, to a new equity firm,
and that gives Jason freedom from "his golden handcuffs" as he put it. He
wasn't sure where he wanted to go, but he had his options. At that point, it
felt appropiate for me as well to tell him about my thing, about how I was
arrested and charged with a felony for possession of a controlled substance,
and I've got it under wraps, and I've been accepted into the First Offender
Drug Program, so I'll have to pee in a cup for six months, and some other
things, and it will get dismissed and then expunged.

We then went on to talk about religion. About a lot of things regarding where
we stand on religion. It was interesting, from what I understand, he says he is
Christian, and that he believes, but that he's not ready to make the plunge
into the belief in the same way Lacey or Ann is, and well, the biggest thing I
remember him talking about was how much he disliked going to church.

He then continued to focus the topic of conversation on me. We went and talked
about romantic things. We talked about, or rather, he asked me about, what it
is that I find neccesary in a girl. We went over that, and I gave him the
things that I think are most essential. First being honesty, and the next being
a certain level of emotional maturity, and then being able to disagree well.
And all of those things matter. We went in circles a bit with that.

Then we started talking about work. We worked around the topic of "do you like
your job," and the answer to that was "well, I know it is good for me for where
I am at right now in my life, but I don't particularly like it." Something like
that. I also went to say that it could certainly be a lot worse than it is now.

I just went for a jog, it was much needed. I haven't done anything physical
since Monday, and well, it was wearing on me.

So back to where I was. So we started talking about work, and I ended up
getting to the point of "I don't really like it, but it could be a lot worse,
and I'm afraid to touch it, or mess with it."

What we ended up getting to, with Jason, was the question of "Okay, forget
limitations, what would be your ideal path in 20 years". What we ended up on
was, I want to go back to school, back to acedemia, and continue work on some
thesis. I don't know what that thesis is, but it's there. And from there, what
it looks like is, I would apply that thesis in the real world for some time,
and eventually go into some sort of professorship. So something like that. It's
just with the path I am on, I don't know how that path might fit in to this,
and well, it's a difficult thing to grasp hold of. But it's there.

Essentially, after a few hours of conversation, Jason and I went our seperate
ways, I went to my apartment, and I went to bed.

So that was all a really interesting conversation with Jason. There isn't much
point going on with the details, but something I will say is that Jason is very
good at directing the coversation towards the one he is having the conversation
with. A few times, I tried to direct the conversation at him, and he always
reflected it back.

So this is a good preamble to the dream I had last night. It was a very
enlightening dream, and I don't know what entirely to make of it. Like all good
dream I suppose. Also, I want to mention that as soon as I woke up, I spoke the
dream into my phone, but I want to try and recall it without that, and see how
far it goes.

So the dream strats, and I am in the study, playing Final Fantasy VI. Rather,
it would be more accurate to say that I am in the study trying to load up FFVI,
and I am struggling with the PS2 to get it to load. I remember thinking for a
moment, "silly PS2, it's a very old system, and it doesn't work very well
anymore, but I still want to play this game." Well, eventually, I got the thing
to run, and was able to get to a sort of character selection screen, in the
menu for FFVI, and in this screen, I could pick certain characters, and go from
there. I then thought, "I have to load the save that has all of this already
done for me." or something like that. I also remember thinking, "I will
complete this game at some point." But I never really got it to go.

So I am already mixing things up, because now that I think about it, that was a
different part of the dream. That was entirely seperate for the dream I want to
recall.

What may have happened is, I may have had a false awakening from that dream,
which was not in the study of my parents place but instead in its own dream
location, in the location I know I have thought about DKC2 before in a long
past dream, and I woke up from that dream into this dream. False awakening. So
I was in the study of my parents place, and I was sleeping on the floor, and I
had already packed a bong from the night before, and it was sitting there, and
I took first a small hit out of it. I took the hit, and as soon as I did, I
started to evalualte what was going on. I thought, "God, is this my life now,
is this something I am going to have to accept, only four days out from peeing
in a cup and I have taken a hit." And I remember thinking, "it shouldn't be a
problem, one hit should be okay," but still, it was a thing. I then thought,
"is this a dream or is this real life." And I didn't do a reality check, like
you do for lucid dreaming, but before I had figured it out, I said to myself,
"fuck it, I'm already in deep, let's take another." I think it was in taking
the second hit that somehow, I don't know how, but somehow I knew that it was a
dream. So I felt much safer in that conviction now.

So I just woke up, and had taken two hits, but still was feeling very groggy
from waking up, so I got out of the study, and went into the living room. I
actually went through the living room, and remember going to the back rooms
in the hallway there, and I talked to Kyle for a bit. It actually might have
been talking to Kyle that I realized that this was a dream. Maybe. I wholly
just made that up. But I remember saying, "I am especially groggy," and Kyle
replied, "Mom and dad are the same way, you should go into the den with them."
So I went back into the living room, and mom and dad were there (they were
there before too, but I didn't really acknowledge them on the way through the
first time) and dad was sitting in his chair, and mom was sitting on the
fireplace, and where mom's chair usually is, there was an elliptical machine.
So I got on the elliptical, and started using it, and mom made some comment
like, "Oh, so you want to use dad's elliptical" and she made this comment in a
genuine question sort of way, not in the accusative. And I said that yeah, I
just wanted to get the blood flowing because I wasn't quite awake yet, and
getting the blood going would be nice.

So as I was on the elliptical, I think mom actually showed me on her Ipad,
something she wanted to show me, but before that, there was an ad that played.
So she sort of dismissed it, and let the ad play, but it was the ad that became
the central focus of the dream from that point.

The ad was a scene in a porno. It was not an add for a porno, but intsead, it
was just some number of seconds (i want to say 30 or 60 but I think it was 45)
of porno going on. The way that the scene was filmed, it started at the start
of a hallway. Everything was dark, and it had a sort of steampunky feel to it.
Like laser tag, where they have the fog and the dark walls and everything. This
was the scene, but it was along a hallway. And on either side of the hallway,
there were dividers, and in the dividers, there would be a couple having sex.
And the whole thing was a bit S&M'y, would be the best way to put it. There
wasn't any explicit bondage, but the demanor of the people fucking in the scene
was one of grimace and passion, in a sort of dark way. That is the best way I
could describe it. And the first couple that the camera goes across, they are
mostly covered, but the thing is, the sort of appeal of this porno, is that you
can tell that they are fucking, but they are under sheets and clothes and
things, but as the camera goes by, in the passion, the man will rip either the
clothes or the sheets or whatever that covers the interesting bits, and in so
doing, the breasts of the woman will be revealed, and you can see the genitals
and the penetration that is occuring.

So it goes through this hallway, and all of these people are fucking in their
dark and passionite way, and it gets to the end, and the last guy, the best way
to describe the way he is fucking his girl is with the word "enthusastic". He
is fucking her with much enthusiasm. He is using delibreate thrusts, with
meaning, where as the other guys were using more mechanical thrusts, and he is
almost exhalting himself, putting his hands in the air, and creating "a
magnificent act".

So that was the scene, and it ended there. And I don't know if my mom asked me,
or if I volunteered. I think I volunteered, because I then said, "I don't like
that scene, I think it is bad." And my mom I think was like, "that's good for
you, I agree, I think it is bad as well," And I said, "No, I think it is bad
for a very different reason than you think it is bad." And she inquired, "Oh,
well we both can agree that it is bad" and I said, "No, let me clarify,"

At this point, the dream shifted into the scene. I was in the room where the
people were fucking. I was there, just observing. My mom was not in the picture
anymore. I was just there, observing the scene being filmed.

So it was the same scene as I have described, with the hallway of people
fucking eachother, but this time, I was actually there, and in the middle,
there was a camera man with a camera, on a rail, and behind him was the
directory. And here, you could hear the director giving instructions as the
camera was rolling. The director was very enthusiastic. "Yeah, that's good,
work it, I like it, go for it," etc. etc. the things you might imagine that a
director would say in such a situation when he likes what he sees. And he gets
to the last person, and the last person is again uncharateristically out of
place in the way I described earlier, and we get to him, and the director
continues with his dialog, and when he gets to this person, the director says
something like, "Okay, okay, more dark, more passion" but he doesn't want to
break, so the guy tries to give it more passion. Then the director cuts the
film.

At this point, we get to the end of the hallway. The way the end of the hallway
is, the hallway goes into a sort of other hallway, that goes in a reverse C
shape. So the hallway goes into the bottom of the C, and then there is another,
curved hallway, that begins to our left, (you can see some office like
structures and things, but it's still very dark and steampunk), and continues
on to the right, along more curved hallway that will be described as we
encounter it.

So we are at teh end of the filming hallway, and in the base of this C section
of the building. And at this point, the director takes the enthusiastic man to
the side, and starts talking with him.

"You see, I like where your heads at, I like your passion, but what you've got,
you see, what you are doing, you are doing my mood, and my mood, you
understand, I do my mood because I am behind the camera, but I want something
different from you. You are in front of the camera, so your mood, your mood has
to be more dark. You are doing me to much. Let me do me, and you do you.
Understand?"

And the guy replied at this, "Well, I could turn it down, I could do less
enthusiasm, but that seems wrong, I don't want it to be boring and somber,
that's not what you want, is it, so what you're saying doesn't make sense to
me."

And the director replied, "No, no, you see, you can keep the passion, just
redirect it on a different dimension. You're doing my dimension, I need you to
find your dimension, the dimension of on the camera rather than off of it."

And the guy still didn't understand, he was wholly oblivious to the concept of
"I should keep the passion but direct it towards a different mood," and was
interpreting the director as saying "curb your passion" which to him meant
simply providing the opposite of what he was doing.

After some back and forth dialog like this, the director says, "walk with me."
and they start walking down the C part of the hallway.

So now I will describe this C part of the hallway. Along the bottom, like I
said, where the filming parts meets the C part, there were some rooms like
offices and things, some doored off, and others more like cubicles. Along the
side part of the C, when you go off to the right, there would be, along the
left wall, a row of stalls, with toilets in them. The stalls did not have
doors, but the toilets were almost like porta potty toliets, but they had
bowls, as in, they were almost a part of the wall, and the bowls of them were
very low to the ground. Then, on the left, there was a row of urinals. It was
in this part that they started talking.

"You know what, I see that you don't understand what I mean, maybe you would
understand better if I jerked you off. How would you like that, huh, if I
jerked you off" This was the directior. The guy replied, "Oh, no, I would
rather you not jerk me off, that seems wholly unneccasry."

It was at this point there was a sort of shift. I can say (and this is me
speculatiing at this point) had the guy agreed to letting the director jerk him
off, he might have understood what the director was trying to say, and things
would have ended much more well for this man then they did. But having denied
the request by the director to jerk him off, the director then continued.

"Okay, how about I show you how I use a butt plug then. I have a very special
butt plug that I would like to show you, and I think it would be great for
you."

And the guy at this then said, "You know, I would like to try that, I don't use
butt plugs very often, so this seems interesting."

So at this point, they made it to the top of the C, and were turning to the
left into the last part of that curved hallway.

Now in this part of the hallway, the stalls on each side were similar, in that
there were dividers, and the dividers in this part were very similar to the
dividers in the previous part. But here, instead of toilets and urinals, on teh
left side there were lawnmowers, and on the right side there were weed eaters.
Legit lawn equipment. And they were attached to these walls with a rope,
similar to the rope you might see attached to something that require quarters
to use, and when you put the quarters in, the rope allows you to retract the
thing out, and the rope uncoils and coils with a spring.

Anyway, they get to this room, and the director goes to a weed eater towards
the middle of the hallway, and he grabs one of the weed eaters. He takes it,
and he holds it, so that the weed eating side is towards the ground, and the
motor side is facing the man. The motor, also, was very smooth and cylindrcal,
perfect shiny black plastic. I then remember the director saying something
like, "check this out, you can use this as a butt plug just look here."

And at this, the director pointed to a part of the cylindar that was somewhat
exposed, it had a part that was similar to the edger. And as the man went to
bend down with his face close to this, what the director was point at, the
director grabbed the pull string, and pulled it, starting the motor and the
edger like apparatus, where the path of the blade hit the man in the face. The
man got cut, rather badly, in the face there, and he recoiled, more confused
than anything at what was happeneing.

At this point, I knew it was wise to get the fuck out of there. I had
anticipated this sort of thing by the director at this point, and was ready to
continue along the C to the top, to the end of the hallway, where I knew there
was a stairway down. I did not look back, but as I was walking away, I saw two
thugs of the director come to this man, and proceed to help the director in
killing him. I don't know in what exact way that they proceeded to kill him,
but I do belive that it involved ramming the large cylidrical end of the
weedeater, the end that had the edger blade on it, and jamming it into the mans
ass while the thing was running. I don't remember hearing screams or anything
like that, but I didn't care to see any more.

Something I do remember thinking as well is, "I know that the director does not
have any beef with me, and he probably won't go for me after this man. It is
wholly with this man that the director has beef. But still, I should get out of
here, his presence is obviously not what I want in my life right now." So I
walked to where I thought the stairs were, but when I got to the end, I didn't
find any stairs. All I found was a map of the city, the city where this
building was. This is the same map that a lot of places are, in my dreams. I
should draw the map at some point and place these points on them.

But I remember panicing for a bit. I looked back, where the man was being
murdered, or at least, I looked down the hallway in that direction but I knew
he was being murdered around the corner, and I thought, "is there a way to get
out of here." and then I thought, "Will I be killed like him, for wanting to
get out of here?" It was around this point that I woke up.

