So today I want to talk about something I have been thinking about. That is, I
want to try and have a stream of consciousness and see where it takes me again.
That was interesting last time, and I want to try it again and see what
happens. So here it goes.

Last time I said things about the project I was working on, it was something
that was on my mind, and something I wanted to say. Now, I am stuck, because I
want to try and copy the solution of the Alliant Background worker, but I don't
know how to do that in an intuitive way, so I am not doing that and instead
doing something else.

Something I just thought is that I want to try and do a stream of consciousness
for various works of fiction. I could imagine a sort of way of thinking about
something like the odyssey, and reading it in a way where I talk about what I
am thinking about as I am reading it. It's something interesting to think
about. I am trying to think of the best way to get out my thoughts on something
where something is happening, but it's difficult because writing out the
thoughts forces me to go through them in a slow and methodical way. But maybe
that is better than just having the thoughts come and go into nothing, and to
only have them be in the subconscious.

So I have been playing final fantasy x-2 lately, and I have gotten to the point
where Yuna sings to everyone in the thunder plains at the end of chapter 4. So
I want to say something, and that is, I am somewhat obsessed with the final
fantasy games. They have clearly hit on something that resonates with me in
some way with their stories, and I want to try and make something of a cohesive
understanding of the various games, so that I have some idea of what is going
on when I play these various games. There is something that hasn't connected to
me with the way the games are put together. The stories all have some sort of
overarching theme, and I'm not sure what that theme is, so instead I am left
with sitting here thinking that I am missing something and that I have to play
the game again to try and understand something that I am missing. It's like
when the dog jumps up to try and bite the water hose. What is the dog trying to
do there? It's trying to bite something, it's trying to grab a hold of
something, but it's not getting it, so it keeps biting the water, and it never
gets a hold. THat's how I feel with these games. The water is there, and I am
reaching up to try and bite it, but I keep getting nothing back down with me.

Something that is there for sure though is the idea of a story. That is, in
Final Fantasy X, for sure, there are some really great themes portrayed
throughout the game. The symbolism of the ending, of fighting your father in
the belly of a whale, is the exact sort of symbolism that Peterson talks about
in Pinochio, and in that way, it's very much like that in the way it's told.
But also, in X and for sure in Tactics, and probably in XIII and others, there
is always something of an anti religion theme. That is, there is always some
force that is trying to harness the power of the gods in some way, and you are
always fighting against it. But it's interesting, because you are not the
existance of gods, the existance is taken to be true, but you are fighting that
which would try and control the gods for their own gain.

I think, it's important to talk about reality here. Reality is that which
exists apart from any perception of it. And with the perception of it, we are
able to stay in touch with our existance.

It's important to have a perception of reality which matches the perception of
it. I was watching Eric Weinstien talk with Joe Rogan on podcast 1203 about
these ideas of the fact that physics is almost complete. That is, there might
still be things about the real world which we don't have a model for, but
everything about the real world which we are able to perceive to the best of
our abilities so far, we are very close to having a complete model for. That is
to say, we are very close to having a complete model of the human perceptable
living world.

I was not aware that this was where we were. I very much thought, (and still
think until I investigate further so that I may understand this) that there
were apparent contradictions in the ways that we think about physics, and in so
doing, we have not come up with something like a unified model of the world
that fits perfectly with what we perceive about the universe on every mode of
perception. In other words, I have felt that we have a model of the world which
attempts to describe things at the atomic level, and begins to break down when
things get to certain magnitudes, and then we have a model of the world which
attempts to describe things at the universe level, and breaks down when you get
to areas like black holes or the initial conditions for the big bang.

I want to learn more about these things, because they are very interesting to
me. I want to find something like feynman's lectures of physics for the quantum
world, and likewise something like that for the general relativity or
cosmological world. I want to understand these things.

Now, I have here something of a conundrum. I want to learn these things, but I
know two things will happen. First, I know that, in doing this, I will lose
motivation, I will say, "What's the point? What am I going to do with this?"
and at that point, I will stop reading as much, and get to the point where I
don't want to read or study any more. The second thing is that I will become
exhausted of it. This is basically a corrallary of the first point, that I will
lose motivation, but different than that, as I am reading or studying say
quantum theory, I will get to the point where the amount of mental energy
required to understand what is going on will get so high that I will say, "fuck
it" and do something else instead. I will play a video game or masterbate, or
smoke weed, or something else carnal, and I will lose interest.

So both of these things stem back to my motivations. I am at this point in my
life, I need to break from my parents grasp, but it seems so dauntingly
difficult to do that. I am feeling empty. I was talking with my mom yesterday,
and I felt, on the phone, that I wanted to talk about how empty I felt, and how
I am missing something in my life, but I know that she has nothing to offer me,
notwithstanding the situation with my dad, that I knew it was actively negative
to do that. At the same time, I am still holding on to so much resentment from
my parents, I feel so almost betrayed by the way that I have been born into a
sort of honey trap that I was unaware of. I see this happening to Evan as well.
Kyle has done a better job at escaping it, but only to a point.

So now I am thinking about something else. I am thinking about my problems with
writing fiction, in particular. The problem is that I have a hard time
discovering the different characters, and what they say. I need to come up with
some excuse for diving into a sort of escapist world. I think that's the issue
is that when I read, I let myself stay above the escapist world, but when I
write, there is something that has to happen in order to make the writing work.
You have to escape in order to write. At least, that's the way it seems to me.
It's possible that this is not the case, but I think that it is true that in
order to write something, you have to escape.

So I think the first thing to do is to write about the thing that I want to
write about. That is, there is something that has to be written, something that
has to be played out, and in order for that to happen, the writer himself has
to escape into it. For instance, last time when I wrote about free will, I had
the some what interesting experience of diving into my mind, and finding all of
these different personalities inside of me that all had different points of
view on free will, and then I put them up against eachother in a free debate
format. I had something like god act as the mediator, although that was not at
all god, but instead was more something like me, or myself, and then I had all
of my different personalities juke it out in a sort of arena. One person, the
part of me that is very christian, had one point of view, and the part of me
that is very athiest had another, and they juked it out while others were
allowed to interject. I'm not sure if this is the best way to write a story
though. In other words, I did no world building for these characters, and
instead I just conjured them up, and had them take course in dialog. It's this
dialog which I think is the core of what should take place in writing. In other
words, it's this dialog which gives the essence of the work being written, and
everything else is just the framing of that dialog in some context which gives
the reader the ability to dive into that world.

So this dialog is what is important, but I am missing something. Why is there a
world where something like a giant exists and something like a puny human
exists, and then something else exists.

I could take the approach of Bojack Horseman, where these things are merely
taken as fact. In that show, the animals are just part of the world, and
everyone takes it as a given that some of the animals exist in the world and
act as regular members of society.

This is an approach that I think I will have to take in my writing.

It still feels wrong to me though that there isn't some sort of framing. In
other words, in some sort of fantasy world, there must be something which
brings about the understanding of the world as it is.

So I think what I am missing is this. I have just had something of a
revelation, and that revelation is that every story is a story that has to do
with some psychological development. That is, the development of a story is the
development of some psychological idea, and in that way, you are able to bring
about that idea and bring it to life in this sense. So in what way are
psychological ideas brought forth into life? In other words, why is it that we
are able to accept something like middle earth as the essence of all things,
and we are able to accept that as the pretext for a story, but we are not able
to accept something like a bojack horsman way of just placing all of the people
there.

In other words, if I were to start writting a story, and the story was such
that we get to a place, and in that place there are elves, the reader would
want to know, "Where did these elves come from?" and in fact, that would be the
prominant question that someone would ask. So where do the elves come from? In
other words, why are there elves in this story, how did they develop, and what
ideas do they represent? Or what ideas represent them, may be the better way of
thinking about it. You don't want to make something like the elves, or angels
in my case, be something rather black and white.

For insteance, in my mythology, the mythology of the angels and fice, with
which Fice represents something about my relationship with marijuana, but also
represents my touching of the negative aspects of the psychodelic experience,
in this mythology, I can think deeply about where the angels come from. Well,
the angels have always been. They are immortal in a sense, they never die, and
then there are the headless angels, those that have impaled their own heads,
and the hilt of the sword which goes in to their backbone becomes something of
their new head, with the ruby or saphire stone in the base of the hilt being a
sort of obsure replacement for their now non-existant face. This idea has
something very compelling to me in it, but I don't know how to bring it to
life in any way. I am stuck here just writing some really bad action scene
where the headless angel infiltrates something, and takes it out, and it
doesn't really mean anything, it doesn't make sense, and it is just there
because I am trying so hard to bring it to life, and it doesn't happen.

So in this world, with the angels, I want to get a few things straight. God
exists, but none of the angels know what he is like. None have seen him. In
fact, well, in this world, I'm honestly not sure what God is. He is something
of the elusive nature of god. The angels used to fight for God, and God was the
head of the angels, head in the metaphorical sense, but he fought and won and
conquered the lands.

So what do the angels do in this world? In other words, I think that the angels
have to represent something in some way correlated to the real world. That is,
I have this idea that perhaps each angel corresponds to a real person in the
actual world. There is a cave in the angelic world, where the angels can go,
and they can there touch the others. In fact, that would explain religious
experiences. In the cave, the angels can go, and they can touch deeply in some
way the real world.

But I am always missing something. This is what this world is like, but what
happens in this world? Do things actually happen, or do the angels just have
something here that is happening, and it correponds to something else in the
real world? Do I make some correlation to historical events in the real world,
and draw them to things that happen in the angelic world? That seems wrong. It
seems very wrong. There is something that has to happen. Something has to
happen. I am missing something.

So what exactly is it that I am missing. I am missing a main character, or a
hero, or anything of that sort. I am missing the lens by which I can relate to
this world. I am missing this. This world represents something of a sea of
ideas that is constantly swarming in my head. I see the different nodes of
ideas in my head as certain angelic nodes, and the angels, they fly between the
nodes, and they maintain them, and they generally have discussions and such,
they have gatherings, they make rituals, and etc, and when they do, it reflects
something of a change in me in my life.

So let's talk about fice, now. Fice is two things. Firstly, Fice is an angel.
It's an angel that was born. He was made manifest to me through my usage of
marijuana. But in teh angelic world, Fice is only one angel. But there are many
angels who worship Fice. Some angels have made something of a node, in my mind,
and have created something of a shrine to Fice, and they celebrate him, and
they celebrate what he has given us, and what he means to us. There are also
those who would pay respects to fice, and would stop by his node, and would
educate themselves about this sort of "cult of fice" but would continue along
their way.

Something also, is that various members of the angelic host, various angels
will host speeches. There must be some framework by which they are able to give
speeches. They will give these speeches in this way, and in so doing, some
angels will listen, and each will modify their own way of living according to
what that angel has to say.

Now, to what extent are these angels named? In my brain, they are never named.
They usually have something of colors associated with them. So they wear robes,
and such, when they give speechs. As they accept each cult, or way of being,
they start to adorn themselves with different robes, and such. In what way is
this what I want it to be? This works well for my head, but it does not bode
well for describing them in a written form.

I think this is part of the trouble I have with naming things. I say, something
is such and such color, but what name is that? I don't have a way to talk about
names based upon colors, I can only create colors. I can see a name, and think
it is a color, but I can't see a color and draw out a name from it.

In a way, the nodes are the people in this way of thinking. The description of
each node, what it's different chambers look like, and what it is meant to
represent, that is what is considered the living thing in this world. So Fice
would be something of a bunch of followers. And it's the followers which make
the thing come to life. So Fice is not an angel. In fact, I could imagine some
plot where angels band together against someone who is found to be fice. So in
this way, all of the angels collectively create something of a living thing.

Now, it what way do these living things talk to eachother? Well, they talk to
eachother through the angels. That is, the angels have discussions. And they
angels can have their nuance. Each angel is characterized by the relationship
that they have to the created existance of the nodes. But the angels understand
that it's not themselves that is the living thing, but instead that it is the
node that is living.

So I have gotten this idea about how to tell this story in a way to make it
interesting. Each node has it's own perception about the angelic world. Each
node gives the angels a reason to continue to exist, and to live the way that
they do. For instance, the node of fice could posit that the true mode of
existance has to do with the striving for "the true synysthetic experience" and
that the purpose of life to to find a mode of being that allows everyone to
trancende the realm of the senses as one thing, and instead to see the world
that is as something that the notion of "all being represented as one
structure" as the most supreme notion of being.

And then there are other ways of being. For instance, I have in my head
something of a facist node, a node that posits that there is one true way of
being, and that this way should be forced upon any that would oppose that way
of being. Of course, it would not be called fascism, and the idea I am thinking
of is different than the idea of fascism, but the point is, this node develops
as a way for the angels to see themselves as the supreme leaders in their own
way of thinking. It becomes something like the harsh reality where everyone has
to watch for backstabbing, and is constantly looking for ways to backstab their
neighbors and such.

Each way of living has it's own sort of idealogy. And each node will come to be
it's own sort of living thing. It lives, it dies.

So the story then, or at least, the way in which this story is revealed through
writing, is in the observations of some bystander. I have the idea of some
angel, and this angel has, for his entire life, been brought up under the ideal
of something like the christianity. And this node is so large, that he is
unaware of the existance of other nodes. And then, someone takes him out, and
he is now left to discover the world.

I think that this story must end with him becoming headless, in some way. The
headlessness most certainly represents death in some way, but a sort of death
that is not very much like our mortal death. This death is instead something of
a symbolic death, because in this death the angel will be able to spread it's
wings and fly.

Now I have a strange notion now. I am not sure of this. How immortal are these
angels? I have this feeling that they are truly immortal. That is, they have
always existed, and they always will exist. But I am having a sort of sticking
point. What are they made of, is the first thing? I have this idea of the sort
of "World when we are born" and it is an empty range. But this is wrong. It is
not empty. It begins with something. Or rather, if it really represents the
infant being born, there are already buildings that exist here.

But do the angels reproduce? They most certainly don't get pregnant and have
children. So where do angels come from? I like the idea of them coming out of a
cave. The cave they come out of represents something like the birth of an idea
into the consciousness. So each angel comes in from the cave. But they do not
come in as angels. This is a rather interesting notion. They come in a spirits,
I think, and the spirit takes the form of an angel. So in this way, they are
brought into the world of the angels. There are many caves through which they
flow in. Now I am struggling with the notion of what form they may take. I most
certainly want many of them to take form as angels, but thinking on it now, do
they always take the form of an angel? And angel is perhaps not the right word.
Instead, I am simply thinking of some form of winged human thing.

So I have gone off on a tangent looking at Eastern Orthodox art, and I am quite
fascinated by the whole thing. It has the same color as the one ring of the
Lord of the Rings to me, that is, the actual physical color of a lot of the art
has the same glow as the one ring does to me metaphorically.

Right now I am at this point. I think the biggest take away is that angels come
into this angelic world through these caves as spirits. In fact, now that I
think about it, there will be certain springs that where people are able to
take these spirits, and harness them into something concrete. There will be
angels taht do this.

In fact, this could be how my POV angel comes into the world. Well, this is how
every angel comes into the world.

This is an interesting story.

I'm not sure if this at all relates to my story with Damien. I don't know.

I also still am unsure about the nature of these spirits. In fact, now that I
think about it, the way that the spirit gets transformed into a physical being
is through the process that goes on in the spring.

So an idea I just thought about is to have the sky in a way represent the
projection of the senses of the person on to this world. In other words, the
sky is representative of the projection of the subconscious image onto the
psyche.

One reason I don't like this idea is because it is too much a direct
representation of this notion that this world directly represents the mind. I
don't think that this sort of direct analogy is the way that I want to go.

A rather terrifying idea that I just had would be some device, which the
ministry of God has created, and I don't want to call it that, but the node
that represents Christianity in the strongest sense, they have created a device
which judges the angels in some way, and based upon those that are worthy or
not, they bury them into the ground. But this isn't burial. Rather, they have
created some notion of their node, some place where they are able to trap and
condemn certain angels. It's a sort of judicious mediator of ideas. The
adjudicator. It's like the dreams I have had where I am in prison, at the
bottom, and I am traveling to the top. I am trapped by the tyrant for things.
This tyrant would the represented by this sort of condemnation of the angels
into a kind of lair.

Okay, so I am thinking of something like an outline of my story.

The first section would be the story of the introduction of our main angel. He
is born into this place, and he is fed a certain rhetoric of the nature of the
world, and he is told his place in the world. He is given the nature of his
reality. The key theme here would be the juxtoposition of the preachings of
those in this world, and the actual doings of the world. It would also be
characterized by this persons questioning of the things around him. The end of
this first section would be marked by him discovering, in some way, the outside
of this node, and seeing it as simply one node in the host of many.

The second act would then be him being taken out of his node by an angel.
First, he would be taken to some other node. I have something in my head. He
would get a much better picture of the world, a sort of nihilst picture. He
would be told that there is no purpose to them living here.

Something interesting to think about, is the notion that perhaps this world
doesn't exist on a planet. Or perhaps, even, that the "earth" that is walked on
is the result of those that have grown weary. Those that are condemned. In some
way, the earth on which these nodes are built on is the earth of the bodies of
these unfortunate angels.

Something is almost right here, but I am missing something.

The network of these nodes are connected by two means. Firstly, the headless
angels will ferry the existing angels on chariots. Secondly, there is something
of an underground connection. The speeches, and orators, and other such things
happen in a congregation type hall. There is a sort of stand, on which the
orator can project his ideas, and around this there are those who would listen.
This happens at the ground level. As you go up through the node, you get to the
main area of the node. Here is something like a party that is going on. Angels
converse and make conversation here. From here, everyone converses. There are
also windows and openings that lead to the outer world, which connects the node
to other nodes.

But if you go down, you reach something of the underground. In the underground,
I am having a few images of what this could be. I see on one hand, a sort of
root like structure, where the roots are grasping at something to anchor
themselves to, and the angels under here will extend out the roots, and anchor
them to something. What that looks like though, I am having a hard time
understanding. I could see many things here. I think, the roots have to connect
to something. The angels could be using this as a sort of conduit to connect
the spirits from the ground towards the spring. So the spirits are arriving
from the ground, and through this network of roots, they will be flown into the
baptismal spring.

The nihilist root doesn't need to exist. The nihilst node does not connect to
the underground, because no soul ever begins there. Well, perhaps the
connecting of the roots of the nihilist node would indicate some sort of
pathology.

I think, part of my problem with this is that it really is a visual
representation of ideas, and I am trying to make it a novel. It's not a novel.
It's a painting.
