# 20180816
So today is a better day then yesterday. At the very least, it didn't start
with me stabbing myself in the hand. So that's a plus.

I did have some dreams last night. Right now, I am writing at eleven o'clock,
in the morning that is, so they are not entirely fresh on my mind. In fact, I
am having a hard time recalling what they were. I am getting these dreams mixed
up with the night before's dreams.

I know one of the dreams was related to sex. I was on the bottom, and I was
just laying down, and there was a girl on top of me, and we didn't want to
acheive penetration.

The other dreams were related to ultimate. I will get back to those dreams
(which were much more interesting) after I finish talking about this breif
dream.

So I was on my back, and the girl was on top, and we were trying something out.
Essentially, we wanted to rub our genitals together without acheiving
penetration. And I remember, first we tried it to where my penis would go
towards my face and to the left, and she would grind on top of it like that,
and then we transitioned to the direction where my penis would go to my feet
and to the right. And I remember saying something like, "it could also go the
other way, but I think I prefer it this way" and she agreed, at which point, we
sort of acknowledged eachother and our shared interest in sexuality, and
continued on. It was a very short dream, but I remember at a certain point I
thought, "Why are we bothering with this sort of thing when we could just go
for actual penetration?" And I played with that idea, but the dream was short,
so I woke up before I got there.

Okay, now to the interesting dreams. I feel as though I had two seperate dreams
about Ultimate. One was the main dream, which occured near the end of REM
sleep. The other was after this fleeting sexual dream, which occured during the
catnaping phase.

So let's start with the first one. I honestly don't remember very much the
timeline of the dream. I know it was an AUDL game, and that I watching it, but
I had freedom to go about wherever I so desired and watch from any angle, and
from any vantage point. I remember, I was with someone, but at the same time I
wasn't with someone. Essentially, I was providing commentary on the game, and
the doings of the game, to someone, someone who was there with me, but this
someone didn't ever manifest themselves in the dream. It was as if I was
explaining it to myself, and myself didn't understand ultimate, and I was
describing the things to myself.

It's a sort of interesting thing, because that is something I will do when I
watch the game. But I do it in my thought. I'll watch a play, or something will
happen in the game, and I'll think "how would I explain this to someone who
doesn't know the game" and I'll think through it. I do it quite without
motivation, it is just what happens in my brain when I watch an AUDL game now.

Anyway, I was watching this game, and something I will say is, there were quite
a lot more players on the field here than 7 on 7. Each team had maybe eleven
players. There was a lot of cloggage, and that sort of thing, and I noticed a
lot more about the openings in the clogging than the other way.

Anyway, the first play I remember is, the view I had at that moment was from
the back of the endzone, and I remember watching the disc get thrown from the
goal line to someone in the back of the endzone, and that someone was Brian
Mente. And I remember thinking, "oh, Brian apparently plays for an AUDL team,
huh" and as he went for the disc, it was just out of his reach, and he didn't
quite catch it. And I remember then explaining to myself (which I will just say
myself, rather then explaining every time about this invisible observer that I
am explaining things to) "that's Brian, I played with him some, he's really
cool, but clearly he's not quite at the top of the pack."

That was that interaction. I then remember going around the corner, and up the
sideline, and going then to a big crane. This crane, it was there to get a
bird's eye view of the game. There was a large ladder that went up to the
crane, and this ladder, it was very long, and I don't remember going up it.
Regardless, I remember going up the ladder. It was at this point that I
remember looking at the teams that were playing. The teams were New York and
Chicago. They were red and blue. Chicago Red, New York Blue. And I remember
looking down, and seeing Carlos Vargas play. IRL, Vargas plays for the Sol. I
remember, Carlos made a play, he had the disc in his hand, and he passed it to
someone else. As he made this play, I commented to myself, "That's Carlos
Vargas, I used to play with him, he is really good, I liked him a lot. But he
doesn't play for New York, that's strange that he's on the field. Here lets
find someone who actually plays for one of these teams." And from there, I
spotted out Chris Mazer, and explained a little bit about my history with him,
and his history with the Roughnecks to the New York Empire, and I pointed him
out and said, "He's really cool as well."

From there, the last thing I remember is, being on top of this sky crane thing,
it was between points, and Griffin Miller (who plays for the Necks) was subbing
in, and he and I both wanted to get down the sky crane, and I started to try
and get down going feet first, facing away from the ladder, because it felt
wrong to go down the "correct" way, and so I determined that I should go down
the wrong way to get on the ladder, but then shift to the other way when I got
on. The reason for all of this was because there was no hand rail or anything
on the skybridge to hold on to for the first steps, so this was why I
determined that starting the wrong way and then switching to the other way was
the "correct" thing to do.

So that was about all I remember about that dream.

The other ultimate related dream was at Nationals. There was a team, I suppose
it was plex, although I suppose not. Rather, it was a team with a lot of Dallas
people that I know, Peter for sure, but also Matt Lang and Kirk, (so it is a
lot of UTDallas people) and they were playing in the semi-final match at
nationals. In fact, now that I think about it, this is the same dream location
where Evan came to me and exclaimed that he took acid. Regardless, in this
dream, I remember it started in the middle of the game. In the game, it was
being played, and on the field on the other side of the hump, was the other
game. But the game I was watching was this Dallas team vs some group of a bunch
of high school studs. And I remember thinking, "wow, that is something, this
team should be way better than this high school team, but they are really hold
their own. I mean, I guess there skill must be somewhat legitamate if they made
it to the semis". And I watched the game. As I was watching this game, and I
watched the highschool team, some young stud layed out for the disc and got it
in the endzone. That is an event that happened. I also remember from the other
game, at some point, there was a stray disc, since it was somewhat windy, and
this disc came over to where I was. So I went to it, and someone playing the
game I was watching was about to toss it over, but I stopped them, and said,
"no no, I've got it." and I went over, and I grabbed it, and I threw it over.
And I remember, on the endzone of the other game, was Jack, and he received my
throw, and said "thanks" in a non-chelant way as he went back to the game.
Well, the other game was Doublewide vs someone, and I don't know who they were
playing, but I remeber looking over, and the players were much tall and bigger,
bigger in a way like, someone took a slider on some image manipulator and
expanded it up to like 120% or something like that. They were just bigger in
the way you could slide an image to be bigger on a screen. And I thought, "this
team may win this semi final match, but there is no way they will win against
Doublewide, that's just a whole different league"

Anyway, the last thing I remmeber about this dream, was that Kyle wanted in.
And so Kyle got in, and he played a point, and I was there with him, and I was
very much wanting to "backseat" play the point for him. I kept instructing him
where to go, where to be, and everything. He went to pick up a dead disc and
put it in play, and I went up right there next to him, and instructed him on
what to do. I then remember, this is where Matt Lang comes in, Matt went to
make a handler cut that was a sort of swing, and I instructed Kyle to swing it
to him, and Kyle did, but the throw was very bad, and Matt wasn't able to catch
it. I forget exactly what happened at that point (the other team probably
picked up the disc, and the point resumed) but I remember going back to my
point of watching from the endzone, and thinking "what a son of a bitch, he
gets to play in nationals, and I only got to play at regionals, and he is way
worse than I was at that time. How fucked up is this." It was around this point
that I woke up.


