# 20181015
Two dreams last night.

The first involved the premise of this. In the sixties or so, there was a patch
of land that was cut off from the rest of the world. However it happened, their
infrastructure came up parallel to ours. We were just now able to uncover them,
and it turns out that they have a rather similar structure to ours, with
phones, the internet, and everything else, and the difference is their history.

The place was by the beach, and I remember that there were some sort of
machines that were going by, and spraying mist into the air, presumably to
obscure the clouds or something. Essentially, the machines were there to ensure
that this place was safe and clean, or something. It was weird.

I talked with one of the children there, but only for a time. We were on a
large hill, that was like a roadway with some of these houses on it, and it
went steeply down into the beach and into the water. When I was talking to her,
she was called over by her parents. Since the unearthing of this secluded city,
she had been a very busy girl with all of the people that wanted to see her.

The second dream takes place in a version of a building that I have been in in
past dreams. This building is hard to describe, but it reminds me the most of
the Wrights house in layout, although not in style.

In this building, I am working with Alliant, and one of our clients has an
error. I ask Ruel and Caitlin, who are working with the client, if they can
pull the error, and they say they can, although it is something of a stage four
green incantation, which I don't really know what the fuck that means, but I
say that it's okay. When they do that, and it doesn't work, I then say if they
can make it a stage five green incantation, and they say that at that level it
might turn into a red incantation, and they showed me a whole list of what to
watch out for in a stage five red incantation of about 30 items, and that if it
came to that I should just curl in a ball to try and handle it.

After they do the stage five green incantation, they have to make a whole
writeup on it, as they have to do with any incantation, but this one is serious
because it was a stage five incantation. I also get the notion that if I wanted
to know more about this story, I should read Dostoevsky's Demons again.

I wake up with two things. First, I think, maybe it's a bigger deal than I
think to do these incantations, and second, Demons has nothing to do with my
work at Alliant. But still, it is something of a premonition, as possession and
hysteria are two things that I want to become more familiar with.
