# 20180928
So last night I had two dreams, both about sex in some way.

The first, I was in a hotel room, and I was with some of my family. Jason and I
went out to the balcony to talk about free will. We were discussing it, and
having a nice conversation, when my mom then came out, and wanted to weigh in
on her part of the discussion. She started talking about how free will was like
a paint on a canvas, and that it morphs. I could tell taht she was about to
talk about something with God.

At around that point, Tim and Lori both came out to the balcony from their
room. They were having a party, and were celebrating the closing of some
business deal that they had just made. My mom instantly stopped talking as soon
as they showed up. They came in, and they started make a loud ruccus and such.
THey had some friends, and rather quickly, they started invading my hotel room
with their party. I went back inside, and joined in for a bit, but I wasn't
drinking, and I wasn't into these people at all, so I decided to leave.

I left, and went to my parents room. My parents room was like a typical movie
theater, with rows of seats facing a screen. The difference was, at teh top of
the stairs, where the film reel would be, there was something of a bedroom
there. My Grandparents, parents, and Kyle, were there. I go up to the top and
stay there for a bit.

At around four am dream time, I go back to my room, and find it wholly trashed.
Everything is in dissarray, and I see stains of female sexual juices, for lack
of a better term (I'm sure there is one, I just don't know it) all over the
floors and the sheets. It smells like this as well.

I am wholly disgusted. Michelle is wrapped up in the bed sheets there, and
Jessica is sitting at a table that is to my right upon walking in. She is
sitting in a chair, looking at another chair, saying that they wanted to make
sure the woman they were closing the deal with was "well paid" so gave her a
blow job on that chair, and she was fixated and staring at it.

The second dream starts with a woman, middle aged, and small, wearing a white
top and I think just white panties, although I don't remember the bottom, so it
could have been nothing, but whatever. She was sitting on a bed. The room was
very similar to my moms room in her parents house, now that I think about it,
but with more windows. It was very open with a lot of natural light coming in.

She was sitting on the bed there, and tehre were two hispanic women trying to
comfort her. She was crying because she didn't want to be raped. The hispanic
women, who had kidnapped her for the purpose of this rape, was trying to
comfort her, saying that it was inevitable at this point, and the more she
tride to enjoy herself, the faster it would go. It would do no good resisting,
because he wouldn't enjoy it if she was resisting, and it would go better for
everyone if she tried to enjoy herself.

So the hispanic woman took her to the edge of the bed, and got between her
legs, and said, "Pretend like I am giving you fellatio, and taht you are
enjoying it". The woman started dry humping the hispanic womans head, who then
said, "No, that's not how you act, pretend like I'm actually doing it. He'll
know its fake if you do that."

At this point, a large black man comes in. He was enlarged like many of my
dream figures are enlarged. He comes to the bed and lies down. The hispanic
woman begins blowing him, and the scared woman mounts him around his chest,
like a BJJ mount.

I woke up, thinking, "How strange, that mounting him would be considered
sexually desirable to the man" That was the dream.

Both strange dreams. I'm not sure what to make of either of them.
