# 20180927
Okay, so I want to keep this brief, but I want to get out these two dreams
before I entirely forget them, so here it goes.

The first dream took place in a theater. It was a large, expansive theater,
like an imax, but wider, and larger, with multiple tiers. James Ferebee was
there, and when the movie started, it didn't work on the theater, so everyone
had to look at his laptop. Eventually, the movie started on the main screen.

We then decide to go further down, to get a better look at teh live music that
is playing in the background during the movie. There was a piano in a sort of
alcove at the bottom. So we go down, and check out the music up close. I end up
talking with the pianist some, mostly talking about my interest in him.

The second dream is more convoluted. We go to Houston, to a house, because of
an ultimate tournament. It's all of my family in the car, but I am driving.
After navigating the streets, I make it to the house that we are getting to.

As we go to the ultimate tournament, we are walking, and then we stop by the
lake. The lake is not quite frozen over. My dad gets in, jacket and all, and I
step my feet in after him. I fall down, and I remark that I wasn't expecting
the drop off to be that sharp. My dad asks if I'm okay, and I say, Yeah, of
course, and I comment how I was expecting my clothes to get more wet. As I
climb out of the lake, I see, off a few meters, a penguin on the shore, using
it's flippers to warm itself. It jumps in the water, and I think about how I
don't want to go to deep because I know there are all sorts of creatures in the
lake.

We get out, and we have to change our jackets, but not our under garments (long
johns) and we get in the car and we go to the tournament. After the tournament
(which I don't remember happening) we go to a store, and grab something. I
remember checking out real quick, but I don't remember what we got.

As we are going back to the house, I remember getting turned around. This time
my dad was driving, and I was trying to tell him the directions, and I directed
him to the wrong direction.

That was all I remember about the dream.
