# 20180822
So today I had some dream fragments more than anything else.

The most obvious one to interpret is, I smoked some weed in my old apartment at
college. It was a similar experince to the last time that happened, I thought
"Shit, this is something I am going to have to accept now." And I thought,
"It's probably not bad, I just peeed in the cup yesterday, so as long as I cut
it here, it shouldn't be an issue." Still, I remember spitting out the pipe
(how does that even work) as soon as I took the hit. It was a nice hit too, I
remember controlling the flow of the smoke with the carb and everything. It was
very vivid, and very realistic. I also remember thinking, "last time it was a
dream, but this time, it was just my impulses and habits that led me too it,
how I have betrayed myself." Something like that.

Another fragment, I was in a gymnasium, similar to the gymnasium that I
remember from confirmation, at King of Glory. It had the balcony and
everything. I have been to this dream location many times before. Well, this
time, there was set up in the gymnasium as sort of maze. Rather, it was like
there were a bunch of walls to a maze, but they were all parallel to eachother.
Some of the walls were different heights. I remember standing on one of the
ones at the sideline closer to the entrance, and hopping from it to the ones in
front, in order, playing a sort of "the floor is lava" game. The floor wasn't
actually lava, but I was playing the game that kids will play. The walls were
divided into sort of sections, as in, there were some pretty mark-ed walls that
were the ones that denoted new sections. I made it through two sections, and
there were a couple times that I thought I wouldn't be able to make it to the
next section without touching the floor, but I was able to look out and find a
wall that I could jump to anyway.

Last fragment I remember, this one  a little longer. We were in a auditorium,
with rows of chairs and desks, and Alliant was having our quarterly meeting.
Leslie was the one giving the meeting. I honestly don't remember what the
topics of the meeting were. I do remember one of them though. She said, "so we
are two months behind schedule now on the programming, but communicating with
your bosses, and the people that make the cases is something that will help
speed the process along." That was something I remember her saying. Beyond
that, there was a bunch of stuff that I don't remember.

What I do remember though, is Valerie sitting a couple chairs away from me. I
remember her sitting there, and being decidedly a bit bored and somewhat
confused, confused because she wasn't sure why we were having this meeting, and
her boredom I think was confusing her. Eventually, I forget if she asked me, or
if I just told her, "It's okay to fall asleep, no one cares about these
meetings anyway, and there is nothing you will have to know." I remember her
attempting to nod off, but being unable to.

I then remember, the scene started to die down a little, and one of the new
girls came at me from behind and started to hug me. I turned around and made a
frame so that she wasn't able to take my back, and I sort of just let things
hang there in that "she is hugging me and I am framing" sort of stance,"
Something to note also, there were a few faces that I wholly recognized,
(Grace, Leslie, and a few others that I didn't make note of) but I remember a
few faces of new people that I didn't recognize. They were new people that will
be new in the future (this is something of a premonition of a future meeting)
so these people represent the people that I know will hire on in the future.

Well, after a while, as the meeting was being convened, I remember going
through with my frame, getting low, and taking her down into mount. It was in a
sort of playful way at this point, like, "Oh, you want to hug, let me show you
a hug" and I took her to mount, and I grapevined her legs, and airplane winged
the shit out of her. She kept turning left and right, but I kept controlling
her. She was never uncomfortable, but I said, "Would you like to escape?" and
she said she would like to try, but after she struggled to escape
unsuccessfully for maybe thirty seconds, she said, "Okay, enough," and I felt
her give up under me. At that point, I let go. I seem to remember that there
were some words exchanged, but it was certainly not something I think she found
particularly attrcactive or anything like that. We went our seperate ways (she
was a service rep, so her desk was opposite mine.)

I do remember, at the end, the scene at the bottom of the auditorium was like
the old camp, on the second floor living space, and I remember going, and where
there should be couches there were desks, and we fit four of us to one table
(they were more like tables than desks). I don't remember much beyond that
except that Valerie was at one table and I was at the same one on the other
side, and there were two "newer devs" there, both nerdy dudes. That's about
all.
