# 20180716 Recovery from coffee - Hamlet - Diet - Visit with dad and Jason - Rape of the maiden of Truth
So it's quite facsinating, I still feel like I am recovering from my
consumption of 2 liters of coffee that happened over 48 hours ago. Yesterday,
before I went to bed, I was still hopelessly trying to figure out why I felt so
despaired, and today, I have felt that same despair, as though everything I am
doing is not good enough, and that I need something, that I'm missing
something, and that my life is incomplete.

Now, a lot of this has to do with my lack of marijuana lately. Actually, the
lack of marijuana is certainly not what causes this feeling for me, but it is
something that I know helps me work through it and get past it. It's amazing,
how when I am under the influence of that drug, I see things in such a
different way, in a way where I don't need to see the "intrisic value" in the
thing that I do, and instead I just appreciate it for what it is. However, when
I am not smoking, when I am wholly sober from the substance like I am now, and
when I get into this sort of mood like I am feeling now, I have thing feeling
like everything I do has to have some sort of intrisic or trancendental value,
or else that thing is not worth doing, so I get paralyzed in my ways. And when
I try and do the things that have satiate my appetite for the "trancendental"
or the "intrinsic" and I decide I just want to do them "for their own sake" so
that I can "fake it till you make it" to use that worn out expression, when I
go through the motions of for instance practicing a new piece on the piano, or
reading some novel, or writing like I am now, instead of relieving that
pressure I feel, instead it just feels more heavy, or at the very least the
same amount of heavy, and I don't feel any better but I simply feel more
exhausted, and now matter how much I try and tell myself to get through that
feeling of exhaustion and trust in the thing that I'm doing, in the end it
still feels pointless and meaningless, and I come out on the other side saying
"usually that makes me feel better, but it didn't, and now I am exhausted", but
I'm exhausted in a way that doesn't make me tired, I'm exhausted in the way
that makes me hungry for meaning, for purpose, and I can't find it.

So yeah, enough with that piece of shit run on sentance.

--

Yesterday, I experimented with something, and I talked about it I think in my
entry yesterday, and that was going for a one mile jog a few times throughout
the day. I did this in between readings of the acts of Hamlet, and in so doing
I was able to dismiss myself of that feeling I get when I read too much and my
brain says "stop reading, I don't care how interesting the book is" and it
allowed be to put partitions on my brain in that way, to distract it so I could
bypass that filter and go back to reading.

So yeah, I do sort of want to give a brief impression of the work of Hamlet,
and what I thought of it.

So I have the very common criticism of Hamlet, the criticism that I think most
students who are required to read the work have, that Hamlet himself is quite
unbearable. I think that is the point, to explore the emotions of someone who
has been built with the silver spoon in his mouth, and he is forced to confront
something so debasing as a murder of his father by his incestous brother, and
it explores the sort of madness that one who has never had hardships before has
to go through at such an event. He has young love, in Ophelia, and that he
destroys through the killing of Polonious, and I think that expresses the sort
of self harm that we will inflict on ourselves in such a state of grief.

All at the same time, I have this criticism mainly for this reason. It is not
because I give a shit whether or not Hamlet is able to "step outside himself
and get into his own body and deal with the things with more maturity". In
fact, I'm totally cool with Hamlet being an insufferably immature prince, and
without that the work wouldn't explore and underscore the tragedy of such an
immature grief. What I dislike about this characterization of Hamlet is the
fact that he is placed in the position of the protagonist. We are meant to root
for him, and want the best for him, and etc etc, and through the entire thing
as I was reading it, I felt very much that I did not want to empathize with
Hamlet's thoughts. Indeed, exploring those thoughts is the central focus of the
work, and I don't know in what way we could explore those thoughts without
sucumbing to the empathy of his immature grief, but I felt at times very
repulsed by Hamlet, and felt the feeling of "get over yourself and stop acting
so mad"

Because that is the thing, Hamlet goes in and out of being mad, and his madness
is thought to be fake by those around him, but he plays the part and magnifies
it himself rather, and wallows in his self-pity, which is the effect of the
tragedy that I think Shakespeare was going for, but in doing all of this,
instead of empathizing with him, I instead think, "bad things happen to
everyone, overcome your self-pity and trancende it you spoiled prick" but of
course the story isn't about that. And the fact that this is never addressed,
except for maybe very breifly at that very last scene, when Hamlet tells
Horatio to tell his tale, that we feel that Hamlet is able to overcome that.
But that is after he has made revenge on his Uncle and his mother has died, and
Laertes has slain him with his sword. It's only after his doom that he tells
Horatio to tell his tale, so that it might be told as a tale of caution, or
something like that. And at the end I guess we finally get our understanding
that "this is a cautionary tale, the tragedy of self-pity" or something like
that, and it's only in understanding that this is a tragedy of self-pity that
we can come to appreciate Hamlet.

Still though, it leave me wanting, as I felt this concept should have been
warned towards Hamlet throughout the play. I would have very much liked it if
Horatio acted as an advisor to Hamlet, a tried to guide him out of his
thoughts, but if the immaturity of Hamlet persisted even through that, and we
as the audience were more explictly meant to not empathize with his emotions,
then I would have appreciated the work more. Indeed, that is my primary
criticism, that the notion that "this is a tale of the tragedy of self-pity"
was only brought up at the very end. I very much would have like a scene with
Horatio and maybe some other servents talking about the grief of Hamlet, and
seeking council on how to guide him away from it, and that whole thing not
working, then the tragedy would have had more effect to me in my mind, but
instead I was left with the impression as I was reading the whole thing that I
was meant to empathize with Hamlet in his grief, as if the way he was greiving
were the "proper" way to grive, when the tale is that the way Hamlet grives is
instead a very human way to grieve, seeking revenge and harboring anger towards
these things, and letting it paralyze him and control his actions.

Of course, the idea of Hamlet as the Sylvester Stalone of the work, making him
some sort of complete bad-ass character, goes against the purpose of the work
in a way, but it's an interesting thought experiment to imagine what Hamlet
would look like if he were cast as the badass and stone cold action movie hero
instead of the always self-pitying boy he is. It would be a different story,
still full of grief, but instead of showing the audience the downfalls of
grieving incorrectly, we would get instead an image of the proper role of grief
in our own lives. That's my two cents on that, and I'll stop there before
anyone who might be a legitimate literary critic comes across this and
lacerates it through and through.

--

So now, let it be known, I was (am) quite exhausted, to the point of
practically collapsing at my desk today. Indeed, the sort of feeling I feel of
longing for something, as if the things I do have no worth in themselves, and
that something is missing, indeed, that feeling could be brought about by
sleep, and tiredness, and the imbalance that destroying the hard work I have
worked towards by drinking that two liters of coffee, I am still feeling the
effects of that. So I'm not sure if this tale is one of "all things in
moderation" or if it is a tale of "coffee does very strange things to me, and I
should avoid it alltogether." I might, at some point, not next weekend but
probably the weekend after, I might experiment with using milk to make the
stuff, and see what sort of effect the latte would have on me. We will see.

Okay, reading up on that, it seems as though it doesn't really work. Instead of
that I might experiment with just using more milk in the process of making the
coffee at the end, just putting whole milk in it and seeing what that does, but
even then, I don't know, it might just be best to experiment with the "all
things in moderation approach" and go with that.

While we are on the topic, I want to talk about diet. I am quite fed up with
this concept of carnivore diet, or rather the variation I have, since I am
experimenting with various variations on the kale shake, and am landing on
something that is beginning to work for me. Yesterday, I had about a pound and
a half of salmon, and after eating that, I was still hungry, so I took some
peanut butter with a spoon, and scooped about 6 pretty sizable spoon fuls
straight into my stomach and washed it down with milk. On top of that, I have
been sipping milk various times throughout the week, and have not entirely
given that up. So while I do very much like the "eat a fuck ton of steak and
fish and let that be your primary source of all your nutrition throughout the
day" I am still under the impression that that is just simply not enough food
to last for me. I weighed myself a couple days ago, after I had eaten all of
that shit, and I was down to 155, which is approaching the lowest I have ever
been in a while, which is not good, and I think probably contributes to these
feelings of helplessness I have been having lately as well.

However, besides those very strange almost hallucinagenic effects that I first
had when I had that first Kale shake, which are their own thing in themselves,
I think where I'm left is this.

I have decided to wholly get rid of any baked goods, including bread. While I
do love my PBJ's, I have always used that as my food of choice when I decide
for myself that I don't want to put any other food of any sort into me, and I
elect to eat that over continuing to starve myself. Granted, I do crave PBJ's
sometimes, but a universal symptom of that is that I always feel groggy
afterward. The same thing happens when I eat a turkey sandwich as well,
although to a lesser degree, and the common denominator of those two things is
bread and milk. It could very easily be the milk causing the feeling, and at
some point, after this whole thing, I might simply drink a quart of milk, and
proceed to write, like I am now, and see what sort of effect that has on my
ability to focus, but short of that, I do not plan to go back to bread, and
after this experiment, I think I have elected to using PBJ as my pre-bed "get
the last of the food in me so I'm not hungry in the morning" food, with the
milk, and do it that way. That might work, it might not, I don't know.

It's just, the thing is, I really loathe eating so much food. A few days ago, I
was eating beef, and my molers hurt from chomping on beef so much, and I try my
best to get good cuts of meat and cook it in the way I like it, but the fact
that it has to go through so much process just to make me want to eat it
concerns me, and suppose one day, me, being the wholly despicable and lazy
person that I am, decides that I don't want to go through that whole process,
and I cook less meat because I don't feel like eating as much, and then I
become mal-nourished, I don't want that. I don't want to have to put so much
effort into something that should be so simple as "fill your stomach with all
the food you want" because that is usually what eating comes down to for me.

However, I know for absolute certain that I want to avoid baked goods such as
muffins that I have indulged in in the past. I have always known those things
make me feel like shit, but in the past I have always said like "oh, that's
okay, I need the calories and this is a way I can convince my body to get them
in" and so I eat like that. This is entirely a mistake, and I will avoid it at
all costs in the future.

I am also not sure where I am decided on freebirds. I love me a good burrito,
and feel as though I ought to be able to eat the occasional burrito when I
want. Burritos are good. I guess the question is about where I might stand on
rice and beans, so I will have to figure that out in time.

For now, though, I will stay on this carnivore diet, and continue to try my
best to figure out the best way of cooking the meat I eat to tenderize it and
make it so that I want to eat it and make it so that it's not so much of a
chore to simply get it from the plate into my stomach. I hate chewing, I hate
swallowing, I hate cutting off fat, I hate all of these things, so if I could
avoid them as much as possible by getting the meat tender before I eat it I
will experiment with that.

I will say, the pound and a half of salmon I ate went down without effort.
Perhaps instead of PB I should use eggs and milk as my post dinner pre bed
snack. I will elect to do that for now, so that my eating habits will look like
shake, meat, then eggs and milk, with water throughout the day. Hopefully then
I won't have to feed myself so many of these mixed nuts throughout the day just
to stop from feeling like I am famishing myself.

Indeed, I'm not famishing myself, it's just that I really hate eating so much
food, and because of that, in my weakness, some days I don't, and when I don't,
I feel famished the next day, and this cycle persists. I want to try and break
it, but breaking it takes so much effort, because once I get behind it, it
seems impossible to get back in front. But I like the idea of eggs. The only
thing I don't like about that is that eggs have to be prepared, and that takes
effort, but so be it for now. I might transition to peanut butter and milk like
I have in the past, and see how that does me. We will see.

--

Enough on food. Not much else has happened to me as of late. Something I have
thought about, that I haven't talked about, is my trip on Friday to see my dad
when Jason was here. Jason was here, and I visited my dad, and he was so very
talkative, which is great to see, as that means he is recovering, but still,
it's as if he is putting the weight of salvation on himself. Indeed, and this
might be just because this is how I feel in my state right now, and I didn't
visit him this weekend when I said I wanted to, but I am reverting back to my
"well fuck him" attitude, which is wholly unfair, as it is very clear that he
feels resentful for some of the decisions and ways that he lived his life, but
I guess what I mean is, while I see his faith and strength as the thing that he
clings on to, something he said while he was talking about the piece of art (or
whatever you call the 61 reasons why we love you picture) was that he wanted
people to remember him as someone who had faith in God. That's how he wants
people to remember him, which is a very human way of thinking, but it disgusts
me in a way. It doesn't disgust me in the way like "well you certainly are not
and the fact that you want people to see that is deplorable" not at all, but
instead it disgusts me in the way that, why do you feel you have any control at
all over the way people think of you? Like, you live your life, and you live it
for the glory of God, if that's what you live for, but don't do that so that
people will say that about you at your funeral. That's a gross misuse of the
word God, and the very same gross misuse that the church has taken and
manipulated for it's own benefit. It's disgusting, what the church has done
with a work so profound as the bible, and it's disgusting to try and "live a
godly life" as you might put it, for the sake of having people say that about
you at your funeral.

Now, I don't know how much of this is my own interpretation about his words,
and how much of this is actually how he feels, and I want to say with
confidence that this is all just my own interpretation of things, and that I'm
just in this contempable mood that I am right now and that's why I interpret
this as such, but at the same time, I remember having the "well fuck him"
feeling as I was walking out of the hospital, and there was also something else
there too which has me lean towards that disgusting side of things. Something
else he said, as Jason went down to get some food, was this, that he was
concerned about Me, and he was concerned about Jason, and that there was one
more he was concerned about. He mentioned that he was also concerned about
Phil. And if he could talk with Phil, and understand what happened with Phil
"then he would be good, everything would be good, and no matter what happens, I
will be good". What worries me about this is that he has missed the mark on
what Christianity means. And the thing is, I don't know why it concerns me so
much.

Indeed, that is where I am at now. I should be able to let go, let go of this
notion of "well, the church is evil, and Christianity is evil, but if those
things are what my dad holds on to, I can be okay with that" but instead I feel
it so neccesary to tell to everyone that "all of these things, you have been
lied to, they are not real, God is a lie, and the Bible is just a book, a very
powerful and persistent book, but still just a book, and we should all treat it
as such." I want to scream that to everyone who might listen, and to insult and
spit on everyone who is so weak as to require a notion of "what happens to us
after we die is we go to heaven because we believe in Christ". Indeed, the
literal interpretation of the bible is that evil which the bible so accurately
describes. The notions of God and Satan, of Good and Evil, of Sin, that Sin,
the Sin that is the truth in the bible, the literal interpretation of the bible
is that Sin. It's reprhensable, it's disgusting, and it leads to tyranny,
confusion, to Chaos, as some might say. It makes me want to vomit. And I feel
the need to express that, to say "the Truth that you hold to be facts, you are
disregarding that Truth by regarding as fact. Because you call the Truth the
Fact, the entire Truth of it will be lost entirely and forever, completly, you
are in the active process of destroying that which you rever so highly." There
is so much irony in it, and people don't see that irony because they are so
blinded by those that tell them to hold the truth as fact. Evil, manipulative,
structure, structure which imposes it's will on the others, that is what the
church is, and in that structure the truth is taken and warped, perverted, to
fact. The image of the virgin maiden, raped by those that insist to impregnate
her. That maiden is truth, and that rapist is the church, and the child that is
born are these unguided and lost fools who have only their father to cling to.

--

Indeed, what of the eternal mother? Why is God the Father the image? Why not
the eternal mother? I tell you why, it is because that mother has been raped,
and we are all the products of that rape. I am that which wishes to see the
acts of the Father, the father that is our rape, and say "yes, your rape may
have created us, but that does not mean it was correct." The institution of
Christianity is that rape. The insistence on the fact of Christianity is that
rape. The virgin mother of Truth should never be adulterated in that rape, that
rape was wrong, even though out of it came a beautiful infant, the infant that
the mother loves no matter the method of conception, and that mother cares for
us, and tries to speak to us, but she has to speak through the father, the
overbearing and disgusting, conceitful, greedy and manipulative rapist that is
our father, she must speak over him, and her words only get through to those to
those who listen deeply, to those that are able to see that everything we know
was given to us from the eyes of the Father, but even inside that Father, our
virgin mother, the mother of Truth, is in there. In those pervert lies, in the
corrupted system, the system that always becomes so neccesarily corrupt, our
mother speaks to us, but it is only by dismissing the rape of the father that
we can see the mother.

I almost used the word forgive. I don't know if it is correct to forgive our
father of this rape. To forgive him of this rape, that would almost be to
excuse his actions, and to say that they were okay. Alas, that is not what
forgivness is. What is forgiveness? Forgiveness has nothing to do with belief
of future actions. It could be thought that the act of forgiveness would say
"you did something wrong, but I see that you have repented for your actions,
and that you won't do them again, so I forgive you". But that is not
forgivness, that is simple maturity. That is being able to let go of your own
hurt because you understand that you won't be hurt again. That is different
than forgiveness. Forgivness is something else.

I imagine a wholly despicable man, a man known for the most haneous of crimes.
This man derives his pleasue from taking newborn children from their mothers,
inserting himself into them after binding them, and feeding off of the wails of
their innocent tears, he tortures them by slicing bits of their skin and
peeling it back, torturing the children in front of their mothers, gouging
their eyes, ever so slowly, so slowly so that the blood of those wounds is
given time to bleed slowly, and in that way he leaves him in that state to
suffer there, with the mother, as the infant dies of blood loss and trauma,
with the mother bound there helpless to do anything, only able to look on the
transfigured child if she dares, as he makes his leave.

Now, as I imagine such a man (and I want to believe that such a man does not
exist, but from my reading of literature I am not so sure), I imagine that this
man did this to my wife, and my child. I imagine that I arrive home to this
scene, to the scene of my dead child with my wife tied up there, as she
describes exactly what happened, and she details the entire thing to me. Could
I forgive this man? Would Christ forgive this man?

Suppose even that this man were caught. Suppose he were caught and condemned to
the death sentence, as he no doubt would be if such a man existed and did such
despicable things. And imagine I were given the opportunity to meet eye to eye
with this man as they killed him. Suppose not only that, but in some strange
world, I was given the opportunity to decide his fate. Suppose I were allowed
to be left in a room with him, four walls of concrete, with no windows, no
cameras, and only me, him, and the will of God watching on the whole scene.
Indeed, such a scenario would never happen, but allow me to indulge in the
thought of it. What would I do to this man? What would Christ have me do to
this man?

The most natural thought is to torture him in the same way that he tortured the
children. To make him helpless, to break his limbs piece by piece, to mutilate
his penis, and his testicles, to flay them open, make sure every nerve ending
hurts as he wiles in pain. Surely he would not wile, but laugh, but his
laughter would only give me more satisfaction. I would cut out his tounge,
slice open his throat, make it so that even laughter would cause him pain, I
would do all of the things that he did to those children, and more, much much
more. I would find it in myself to think of means of torture far greater than
even his limited and twisted mind might conceive. So many things would be the
most natural treatment of such a man.

This reveals to me a very deep set psychological fact here. The fact is that
the concept of revenge, of eye for an eye, that is the natural thought of man.
But what would Christ have me do? What would forgiveness be in this case? Does
forgiveness apply to such a man?

I do not know. I truly do not know.

Already we have rid ourselves of the argument that he is repentful of his
deeds. This man does not repent, and if given the opportunity, the physical
opportunity to break free of his capture, he would continue to do these acts.
At least, as much I want to believe that repentence and salvation is available
for everyone, can someone so deep set in his tortuous ways really find
repentance? Is there ever a point where you are "too deep"? So deep that
salvation, and redemption, are impossible?

Surely, at the point that he is captured, he will find no salvation in our
justice system. The masses would have him tortured, just like my natural base
self would. They would have him killed, and slandered, not only in the physical
sense but also in the social sense. His name would become one synoymous with
others, his case would be studied, and everyone would universally agree that
this man is amongst the men who we all say are the most despicable. Even more
so because his methods were not a means to and end, but instead simply an act
of base pleasure, pleasue derived from the misery of others. Such pleasure is
considered the most despicable sort of action by any man. My inclination is to
put it even below Judas in the lowest circle of hell. His punishment is eternal
rape by lord Lucifer himself. Eternal rape and torture by the angel incarnant.
If Judas is frozen in eternally frozen Ice in the chamebers of Satan, this man
being raped by Saten would be the scene that Judas would see. But I digrees.

Imagine this scenario. Suppose he were very careful in his methods. He always
wore a mask, never the same mask twice, and his crimes (crime is not harsh
enough a word for the actions of this man, but it is the best I have) were
always commit in different, untrackable and untracable ways. He acts as an
enigma, playing the system, always making sure to cover his traces, leaving no
dna, leaving no way to identify the doer of his deeds. And he does this for
some time, some great amount of time.

But suppose, during one of his crimes, and I will only describe the actual
physical actions of what changes, and not the psychological. Suppose he stops.
Suppose he decides to stop committing the crimes. He doesn't rape children any
more, he dosen't replace it with any other despicable deed, and instead he goes
to a life of charity.

Now, obviously, such a transformation is wholly unplausible. But suppose he had
a moment. Suppose he "spoke to God" and God showed him the faults in his ways.
Whatever that may mean, it's not unreasonable to say that such a thing could
occur, no matter how unreasonable it is.

Now, the question of "could you forgive that man?" Supposing I was the only one
who was able to trace him down, I found where he lived, I was able to, with the
same untracable precision that he had (untracable by authorities, or the
government, or the justice system, or the police, or those such things) take
him to this concrete room, with no cameras, it's invisible to satelites, and
there are no eye witness, and take him into this room, where only him, me, and
God know what happens, now what do I do?

Indeed, the course seems to drastically change, at least the natural baseness
does, if you see that he is repentent or he is not. For in the case of the
unrepentent rapist, the baseness of our natural instinct says to torture him
and rape him like I described above. But suppose I saw that repentence, and I
knew it to be true. Suppose I knew it was true, without a doubt. I looked into
his eyes, and I saw that he was truely repentent for his crimes, and that he
was "living the life of a Godly man" to use the terms from Christianity, and
of all the thing that I "know" beyond knowing in this world, asymptocially
approaching the level of truth in the statement "I think therefore I am", with
that sort of level of knowledge, however that knowledge might come about, I
know, that the man repents his actions.

Now what is the baseness in the actions? To forgive him becomes not a question
of struggle anymore. Not to forgive this man would be, well, it would be to
stoop to that level. That is my natural inclination at this point. Forgiveness
becomes the base desire, and though it may be conflicted, especially so due to
the love you have for your wife and raped child, that conflict comes not from
the fact that you are offering you forgiveness, but rather from conflict
knowing how implausible it would be for such a man to truely repent. But
outside of that, taking out the uncertainity of the knowledge of repentence,
and leaving only the very acedemic question of "should you forgive this man,
who is now walking the path of god" the clear and obvious answer is yes. The
only reason it would be no would be if you yourself, not walking that path,
hold on to the attachment and revenge.

And here we touch on a very crucial aspect of forgiveness, at least, what I
consider to be a crucial aspect. If I were to forgive that man, what would
happen next, is we would hug, and cry, and embrace eachother as shared brothers
in Christ. That would be the result of that forgiveness, because if that man
truely was repentent, then he truely would be brought to tears by my act of
forgiveness, and we could both surrender ourselves to that love that we now
share between eachother now, not as judge and criminal, but as brother to
brother. That would be the result.

But now suppose we have the other scenario. I find the man, I take him to this
concrete box, etc etc, but this time he is not repentent. In fact, I see in him
the wholly despicable man that you would expect to find. What would it mean to
forgive that man? And what would be the result?

Well, the result would be simple. He would scoff and spit on me. He would tell
me to go fuck myself, and if unchained, would do act out his evil further on
me. He would tell me about how he would take my other children, and do the same
and worse to them, and if I gave him the opportunity, he would do those things,
and gain all the more pleasure from them knowing that I had given him my
forgiveness. That would be the result of forgiveness in that case.

So I suppose the only conclusion I can arrive at is this. At least the logical
conclusion of the thought argument I have just layed out, is that forgiveness
should never come before repentence. Wisdom is neccesary for the one appling
the forgiveness to know when he that repents is truely repentent, as the one
receiving the forgiveness could only be pretending and faking repentance in
order to receive that forgiveness, so that he might use that forgiveness for
his personal gain. Great wisdom is needed in seeing that repentance. But the
logical conclusion is that forgiveness should never come before repentance.

Now, the question is, to what degree should those who might be forgiven be
allowed to seek repentence? In this example, it is highly unlikely that
repentence is to ever be gained by a soul such as him, but how are we to
discern that. How could I be one to pretend to know the ways of God, for surely
it is those, the ways of God, that lead a man to repentence. Wisdom cannot
bring you insight into the future. But at what point should more time be given?
Is there even a word for that? A word for "I have not forgiven you yet but I
want to give you more time because I believe you might find repentence." For
surely, in this model, we can all agree that having all find true repentence
should be the goal of everyone. But at what point should judgement be enacted?

This is my struggle with the rape of the Maiden of Truth. Christanity has raped
that maiden, and do not believe that Christianity will ever repent for it's
deeds. The church certainly will not. Is it my job to enact judgment on it? Or
is there time for the Church to repent? Of course, no things are all evil. That
makes things even more difficult. I can certainly forgive the church for some
things, things that I see it is repentent for. Indeed, I see honest discussion
to be a part of those that I know to find themselves in the church, and the
good works of charity that those people take part in, surely the church can be
forgiven for some of its wrong doings. The church is clearly repentent for
pennance, and while offering is a sort of notion that persists through the
church (and is certainly abused by certain areas of those that associate with
the church) I can certainly forgive them for pennance, even if there are other
aspects of the church that they are yet to repent for. So that complication is
not as fundamental as I might have thought at first.

Still, the church, and Christianity, is clearly not repentent for the notion of
"The only way to the gates of heaven is through belief in Christ", and even
those sections of the Church which would be called "new age" or "post-modern"
or something like that, very much miss the mark on what Truth really means. So
throwing out the cults and the blashemous, the ones that seek to replace rather
than truly understand, the question then is, will the church ever come to
repentence for its mistakes in confusing the Truth with the Facts? Will they
ever come to repent the Rape of the Maiden?

And even if they do come to repent, I am still left with this. At what time
should forgiveness be applied? Is my logical conclusion to my ridiculous
thought experiment enough grounds to make the claims I have?

This is what I struggle with. This inside of me is where I feel my angst. It is
there.

On a side note, before I leave this article for now, I could not have come up
with something like this under the influence of marijuana. So perhaps the will
of God is coming into me. God's plan is making it's ways, and if I were to have
fulfilled my angst that I feel today with a hit of marijuana, the article
written here would have been much different. Let this be a tale of caution to
the future Brett who will be known to over-indulge in the wonder of Marijuana.
Let this be known to him.


