# 20180709 Dreams: Tyrant in prison, Roughnecks practice, Visit with my father, CaringBridge post drafts (that turn into nothing)
So tonight I had a dream. I had two dreams, actually, in spite (or perhaps
because of) my poor sleep. The first dream is the more important, or at least I
think it is. This dream happened in a location that I am not entirely conviced
is new to me, but suffice it to say that it is the location of a prison. In
fact, now that I think on it, last time I was in this dream I was on the
outside coming in, but now this time the dream began (as far back as I can
remember) on the inside. But this prison is not like a prison how you might
think of it. Rather, it is a large, multistory building, very tall, and in the
other dream I remember going into a room with a lot of hanging catwalks that
came out into a large fan area. In another part of the room entirely (in fact,
the area that the fan area is supposed to be doing fan things for I suppose) I
was at the base of a large stairwell. And at this point, at the point that the
dream begins, I will tell a bit about the nature of this jail. So the cells in
the jail, which I know are the places that the cellmates are meant to sleep,
that area is at the top, and there is nothing really to mention about that area
except that I saw it at the end of the dream. However, at the beginning of the
dream, we were meant to do work, to provide power, and this work, I don't
remember the nature of it, and in fact I don't believe I dreamed of this work
at all, I just knew that in the basement, down the long spire of stairs (stairs
that fold like a regular staircase, back and forth across multiple levels) at
the base floor, I found myself in the cell, with other cell mates doing work.
And at the start of the dream, we were done with the work, and we knew that it
was time to carry our things and arrive back at the top of the staircase where
we would be evaluated and judged and sent back to our cells. There was another
cell mate with me there, who had the exact image of one of the cell mates I had
in male holding while I was in jail less than three months ago now. I remember
he and I had a conversation about the nature of the work, and I know that he
was complaining in some sense about it, and my nature was simply resolved in
continuing to do what needed to be done, seeing no reason to complain.
Regardless, we took up all of our things, our tools, (which reminded me of pool
noodles of all things, but that was just one of the things we carried in our
arms as we climbed) and we took all of these things, and we began to climb the
stairs, back up to our cells. And I also remember having more conversations
with other jail members (I intentionally avoided the word cell mate, as that
word seems wrong in this context) as they joined us on their climb with their
handful of supplies, and we ended up forming a sort of line as we returned to
the top floor of this cell. Now, I do feel it is important to say, the both the
bottom and the top floor of this jail were large, but I remember this
staircase being very much like a spire, and from the stairs, and even from the
top floor, there were areas you could look down and see all the way to the
bottom, and in the bottom floor I know there were sorts of generators, and
motors, and other such things that one could imagine provide power, and that
this entire building served the purpose of suppling not only power, but
something more than power, something intangible, I can't put a word to it right
now, but that it was our doom, our condemnation, to maintain this generator,
and we were driven by the wardens of this jail to do so, and that it was our
sentance, not for anything we did neccesarily, although we all had certainly
sinned in some way, but it was our sentence. So back to the climbing, as we
were climbing, we eventually made it to the top, and at the top was the head
warden of the jail, the person who I woke up with similar joy to discover,
similarly to my discovery of the Adjudicator, and this person is the Tyrant,
and it will become plain to see why as I continue. So we make it to the top,
and we are told to put our supplies in the bin, so I place all of my supplies
in the bin under the watchful, ever watchful and attentive eyes of the tyrant,
and I continue on to my cell. And as I start to make my way to the cell, I see
that my fellow cell mate has dropped his pool noodle (and the humor of the fact
that this particular supply takes the form of a pool noodle was lost on my
dream self, it seemed like a perfectly normal thing to be carrying here and I
never second guessed it's reason for being in our supplies) and after he
dropped, I reached down to pick it up. As I did so, the Tyrant, the warden
there, said to me, "Do not help those that can help themselves" or something to
that effect (those words are mine now, I know he said something in the dream
but particular words that happen in dreams escape me) and after he said this
directly to me, perhaps even with a "you there" or something similar, I
remember continuing to aid the jail mate with his pool noodle, and in a sort of
act of defiance, placed it into the recepticle where the pool noodle was meant
to go. I do not recall if I said any words to the Tyrant as I was doing this,
but I know my thoughts were a combination of "I know it is right to help my
fellow man" and "Why not?" (and the "Why not?" was a combination of
respectfulness and genuine curiosity combined with defiance), but I remember
the jail mate who dropped the noodle looked at me, not really with thankfulness
(although not with disdain either), but as I made this action, the Tyrant
announced something to the effect of, "Look, this man wishes to take on the
burden of all. Well, let him." and as the Tyrant annouced this, the
jailers began to reach the top of the stairs, and instead of unloading their
burdens and supplies in the recepticle, they began dropping them on the floor,
not just the pool noodles but the entire pack of supplies. And at this point, I
remember thinking that, if it is true that I will help my fellow man, than I
must continue to do so, even when that help is being taken advantage of, and
without missing a beat, I began to pick up the packs off the floor, which
contianed not only pool noodles, but some slipery tarps and some springy things
and some tubes which were slimy and a little gross and all sorts of absurd
things which are not heavy but simply obnoxious to deal with, (and again, the
humor of these "supplies" only comes to me now in my waking state, my dream
self did not consider this strange in the slightest) and I took them up one by
one, and I placed them in the recepticle. And I remember the Tyrant saying
something to me, something like, "Now do you see the dangers of giving your
help so freely," and I remember still being somewhat defiant, but more being
bent towards my new task of picking up these supplies and placing them in the
recepticle, not out of defiance, but just because I knew that was my new task
that had been assigned to me and I knew that I had to carry it out, not because
of any consequences (which the concept of consequences for not carrying the
burdens did not enter my head at all in the dream) but because I just knew that
was my role in that moment, and I was filling out that role.

There is a lot to unpack in what is going on in that dream, but I think the
interpretation speaks pretty well for itself in the dream itself, so I won't go
over the obvious bits here in the interest of time.

After I woke from this dream, I continued to sleep some more before my alarm
went off. I texted Paco to let him know that I had hurt my back and that it was
still in pain, and proceeded to go back to sleep in ten or twenty minute
increments. In one of those twenty minute increments, I had another dream.

So this dream was more straightforward. This dream took place at the dream
location of the Roughnecks practice field. I have been to this practice field
in my dreams before. The way it is structured, you drive up to it from the
north, and you go into a parking lot which is under the field. Then, from the
parking lot, you go up the stairs, and from there you are at the center
southern area of the field. Indeed, the entire field is built raised above the
ground, and the parking area is below. I do not remember very many details of
this dream except this. I sat there, watching the Roughnecks do their drills,
and as I watched them, I remember having a sort of desire to join in on their
drills, just for one rotation, but I knew it was not my place to do so. So I
sat there, and I watched from the center, where there were a few other
onlookers, and I got a good view from the center of their drill formation, as
they performed their drills. They were doing a sort of cutting and catching
drill, one of those drills where the throwers have a bunch of discs in a stack,
and they are throwing repeated to those in a line who each make a cut in their
turn, and the purpose of the drill is to practice running through the disc as
you catch it. And as I sat there, a small girl (it could have been Kinley, and
the fact that I think it might have been Kinley indicates to me that it was,
although the woman watching her there certainly was not Lacey) had a disc in
her hand, and was encouraged by the people throwing the discs to try her hand
at it, so she threw the disc, and it was actually on target, but very low, and
as the man (with a build very much like C.W. but not him) went for it, I
remember thinking that while the throw was certainly catchable, it's the sort
of throw that requires a lot of effort to bend down while running to catch, but
as I thought to myself "He is a Roughnecks player so surely he will catch it"
he caught it in stride (as much in stide as you can when a pass is so low) and
with a sort of grace that would be characteristic of a high level player. As
soon as he did this, many on the team cheered for her, and the girl was glowing
with the sort of glow that only a proud child could have. And then they
continued on with their drill. I then remember taking my leave at that point,
going to the staircase at the south end of the field (the field went from east
to west, so the south end would be the "away side" sideline, and the necks were
doing their drill running from east to west), and as I did, I remember running
across Jack, who told me I should join in. I then said something like, "no,
that's not my place," and moved on, but I also thought something to the effect
of, "and I don't want to steal that little girl's pround moment." as my joining
in in the same way she did would belittle her moment. So I walked down the
stairs, got in my car, started the engine, and began to drive off. That is when
I woke for real.

Now, I have talked about both of my dreams, and my prayers were answered.
Indeed, I would have honestly been very surprised had I not had any dreams last
night, as my mind was in such a state that I was sure I would have dreams, and
so it was the case. So far I have met the Adjudicator and the Tyrant.

So at this juncture, I feel it quite neccesary, quite neccesary indeed, to put
together my thoughts and feelings from the events of yesterday evening. Indeed,
as I said last night, when I prayed for dreams, I felt as though I needed to
put these things together in my head, and the dreams have provided a sort of
buffer, a way for me to process everything that happened last evening while
still keeping everything fresh in my head. And now it is time. At eleven
o'clock the following morning, it is time.

My weekend was mostly an uneventful one. I spent that Sunday making my way
towards B and N to purchase for myself, under the 2 for 10 discount, the Iliad
and the Odeyssey, and also the Metaphoses, all three of those along with
another book of my choosing. Indeed, when I got there, I saw also the divine
comedy of Dante, and considered purchasing that to fill out the collection, but
I also knew that I wanted to fill it out with some Dostoeyevsky or Tolstoy, so
instead I filled out the final purchase with the House of the Dead by Does.,
and I elected to return next weekend to purchase the divine comedy and fill out
that collection with something else.

All of this is to say nothing much, besides the fact that it was indeed one of
those days where you do things during the day that you have to bring yourself
to do lest you drive yourself mad in the stew of your own body odor and
disgustingness. Indeed, I had to take multiple quick showers that day, as my
tailbone still has not recovered from my ego, and the Chiro appointment that I
made the day previous is not to be fulfill until this afternoon, which I am
eagerly awaiting. This is the picture of my mind at this moment.

After purchasing some books at the store, I then went to the grocery to re up
myself on mushroom caps and avocado, and then I purchased a salmon filet to
fill my belly with. Indeed, I ate nearly a pound of salmon, and it felt as
though it did very little to satisfy my hunger, which I would have otherwise
filled with PBJ and other souch things that I have elected, as I have said, to
give up for the time being. So after purchasing a small ammount of groceries,
with my newly purchased books, I returned from the trip to both of these
stores, and I cooked up the fish quite well, if I say so myself, and finished
it.

And as I finished it, it was approaching the end of the work day, or at least
what would be the end of the work day if it were a work day, and I at that
moment was on the fence about visiting my father or not.

At this point, I find it important to say the state that I believed my father
to be in. I had received text messages from my mother about some nightmares he
was having, and some follow up MRI's and such, and I think the word aphesia was
in there as well but I don't know about what that means beyond the fact that it
means that hes is struggling to process things in some way. However, I did not
realize at all the state he was truly in, which will certainly be revealed as I
continue to write about my experince.

So I called my mother, and when she answered the phone, we shared our typical
hellos, and after a bit of a pause, one of us broke the silence, though I don't
remember which of us it was, and I made my intention known that I wished to
visit. And as I mentioned this, she mentioned to me that I should be aware that
there is "a lot of Aphasia" as she put it. And at this, she then said, "No, I'm
talking to Brett" and then she said that Dad was not sure what she was talking
about. This sort of interaction is the sort of typical interaction one would
have with someone who mistaked the conversation you would have on the phone
with someone who is not on the phone, and so I did not think very much of it at
that time, and I got in the shower breifly, dried myself off, got some clothes
on, and made my way to the hospital.

Approaching the hospital was nothing spectucular at all, the sort of typical
drive down the highway and onto the street. I will say I finally found my way
using the typical landmarks that I have found, and made my way to the parking
garage with familiarity that only comes after visiting a place multiple times.
This is in fact I think the fourth time I have visited him in this hospital,
and so I have become more familiar with how to get there.

Upon parking my car, exiting the vehicle, and walking my way to the elevators,
nothing of note happened. I continued up the elevators, and into the eleventh
floor, where I was then asked to fill out the questionaire that I have filled
out before, and I my temperature was scanned and I received my tag to place on
my breast. I will also make note that this is the first time I did not have to
ask which room he was in, I knew the room number to be 1127. However, upon
walking up to it, I saw something that I had not seen before, the door was
marked with all sorts of stickers indicating masks and gowns and gloves were
required before walking in, which I knew to be the case as my mother had told
me about that, but seeing them there made me second guess myself. I looked to
the room to the left, which did not have the stickers, but I trusted my natural
instinct for number rememberance, (and now I know I will never forget the
number 1127, as that is also the number of my jersey, with an eleven attached),
and I knocked on the door.

When I knocked, I heard voices from the inside, slightly muffled, that I knew
must have been the words of "come in" or some other such words. I made the
knock more out of formality and decency than anything else, as my plan was to
knock and proceed to open the door.

At this moment, I am briefly reminded of a moment, a moment in my memory eight
months ago, of my father first coming to the point of realization that "well, I
have Luekeimia". I don't know why I mention this now, inturrupting my flow of
thought, but the image came conjured up in my head, and I felt the need to
write it down.

Shifting back to the scene at hand, I knocked, heard voices, but before I heard
the voices I was already opening the door, and as I opened it I saw the scene
before me.

My father was lying on his side, on his left side facing the door, so I could
see him and his face as I walked in. I then also saw both Linda and Ann (my
mother, I don't know why I feel the need to call her Ann in this context)
sitting on the couch on the far side of the room, on each side of it, with a
space in the middle as though that were my proper space.

As I walked in, the first thing that struck me was my father. I said "Hello" or
"Hey" or "Hi" or other such lighthearted greeting, and was returned by hellos
and his from at least the women there. I don't recall if my father said hello,
but I do remember making eye contact with him in that moment, and he gave me a
wink. He winked at me multiple times at that moment (and indeed, many times
through the entire conversation) and I was only all too reminded of the image
of his late mother, my grandmother who I refer to as Grandma, who would wink in
a similar way in her old age when we would visit her. I did not visit her in
her state of dementia, as my father did repeatedly, but I in her old age, when
we would visit as a family, she would wink at us similarlarly, and Kyle and
Evan and I would remark about it. It always created a strange uneasiness in me,
as winking is not something that I was brought up to find a normal thing to do,
and winking is a peculiar gesture to me that I have never particualarly
enjoyed. Indeed, it must have something to do with my sense of honesty, as
winking almost always implies a sort of hidden connection between two
individuals that there is some secret shared between them and they each know it
and revel in it together in that gesture.

Well, as I stepped into the room, my father winked at me. I at first did not
return the gesture, and after saying hello, as I have already said, I maintaied
eye contact, and attempted my best smile towards my father. Well, my father
maintained eye contact with me, and continued to wink, at least three and
perhaps even four (although I am pretty certain it was three) times, before I
all at once gathered the nature of the situation and decided it would be the
best course of action to return the wink. So I returned the wink, at which
point I noticed a sense of satisfaction in his eyes, and he broke eye contact
and rolled a bit in bed.

He was noticably exhausted and tired, and you could tell he was making great
effort to keep his eyes open.

I then made my way to the couch, at which point I said hello to Linda and
shared the hugs between each lady there as would only make sense in such an
occasion. The convesation then was started by my mom mentioning that it has
been a while since we had seen eachother.

We all then took our seats, and we began to talk. I think the conversation was
really started by Linda, who asked the very natural and cordial, "what have you
been up to" question. I then replied that I was doing well, I mentioned Jiu
Jitsu and Work and Yoga and all of those things, and that topic of conversation
lasted the very appropiate twenty seconds that it should have. We then began to
talk as my father, who was very visiably tired, began to sleep. Or at least, he
gave the signs of having a nap as we sat there.

At this, my mother began to talk to me about the situation and state of my
father over the past few days. She told me that he had a nightmare on Thursday,
which she had told us about through text, and since then he has been sticken by
a pretty strong case of Aphasia. She told me what the current hypothesis is,
that he had some sort of stroke, and that it is unsure what may have caused it,
but that, due to his extremely compromised state that he is in right now, it
could have simply just been his blood not being entirely working correctly. She
told me that the doctors were in a sort of quandry, since all of the usual
medications to treat a stroke would not be applicable to him, since all of his
counts are out of whack already, and they are performing transfusions and such
to try and rectify that, but it's still very difficult to regulate it and the
usual blood thinners would not make any sense to apply, so they gave him some
sort of plaque breaker, but that it's unlikely to help anything really, and
that we can only pray that this stroke was a one off occurance.

Beyond that, she said that he has almost entirely lost all speech capabilities.
She said that he is aware of what is going on around him, and that she can tell
he is comprehending things, but that he is struggling to process things, and
mostly the only words he can say are things like yes and no, and a few others,
but that even at that he doesn't always get them correct. She mentioned also
that he has been having fits at times, and again I am reminded of my
grandmother, who I have heard, when asked questions, simple questions like do
you know your name, he would say "yes" in a resolute manner like "of course I
know my name" but that asked "what is your name?" he would have great
difficulty in coming up with it.

As my mother was describing this state to me, she said that it also goes in and
out, and sometimes he is able to say things more coherent than yes and no, but
those moments will come and pass, and sometimes he will fixate on a certain
phrase.

All of these things, I did not realize the extent of, and as I listened to my
mother talk about them, I did not feel as one might, worried about him. Indeed,
my mother even talked about how all of these things are reversable, and as she
said that I began to think to myself, "well of course they are reversable"
which I have no conception of in my head, but it's a matter of will more than
it is physical at this point, and I knew that.

In order to lighten the subject a bit, my mom then asked me to tell the story
about the Bovarian Grill, with the dinner between Papa and Granny and us three
grandchildren, and I began to tell the story, and got to the point where the
card was declined.

Then, something happened which I found quite remarkable, and which will stay
with me for quite some time. Indeed, this entire evening will stay with me for
quite some time, and writing it here is only being done so that I can remember
the details and the timeline of everything that happened. But what happened
next is the beginning of what will stick with me.

At that point, in the middle of my story, a doctor came in the room. I saw him,
and he was wearing his mask and gown and gloves and all of the things which are
required for anyone to wear before entering the room, and I did not recognize
him. Of course, that is not strange for me, as I don't know a lot of the
doctors, but what struck me as strange was the fact that he began to introduce
himself, first to my father, then to my mother who got up to meet him. He was a
Kidney doctor. So he walks up to my fathers bed, and begins asking him
questions. First he asked questions about who we were, and we each in turn gave
our names and our relation to my father. He then asked if it were okay if he
could ask a few questions while we were present, and my father said yes, it was
okay. He then asked some questions, things like what is your name, to which he
said Jerry Webster, and then where are you, to which he said UT Southwestern,
and maybe one other question, (not who is the president, because that was
something that Linda said they had asked him before and she had gained
solemn amusement at his response) to which he had the answer, before he then
asked if it was okay to take his pulse. My dad gave him permission, and the
doctor took his stethscope and used it to take my dad's pulse. Before he left,
he asked my father if he had any question for him, and my dad, at this point
was noticably distraught and confused, and looked at me, and I sort of
shrugged, and he turned back to the doctor and said no. Before the doctor left,
he asked about the port, asking "and what is this" and my mom answered that it
was a tri port that was put in. The doctor said that he just wanted to make
sure it was okay, and then he took his leave, removing his gloves and gown and
mask, and exited the room.

And at this point, I have to remind the reader that my father was having a very
difficult time communitcating at all, and there were times when he said phrases
like "for sure" and "no doubt" and this gave great satisfaction to my aunt and
mom who were both there, and said that that's the most he's said lately.

What happened next was astonishing. My father all at once was visibly confused,
remarkably so, and began asking things like "who was that" and "what just
happened" and simple questions like that. At that point, my mother and aunt did
a great job at explained that they were remarkably confused as well. He said
"I'm confused" at which both of them said almost in unison "we all are, that
was very confusing" and that gave him some comfort, but not entirely. He
continued to ask questions, and the women there continued to give their best
answers for him. My mother, who was standing by him up to that point, returned
to her chair, and when she returned there, something remarkable happened,
something which will always stick with me. In fact, it almost brings me to
tears at this moment just writing about it. I dare say that this moment will
make a sort of mark on me as a turning point in my own life and my own beleifs,
but it is too soon to say. All I can say now is that this moment was the moment
that hit me with a sort of profoundity (which I know is not a word) that I
could not help immediately have a sort of shift in myself.

My father began to speak, to himself. I will try to recreate it as accurately
as I can remember, but I know some bits will be missed. The areas around the
ellipses will be the points that will be the most uncertain. I will give the
parts that I know he said word for word after the entire thing.

"Dear god, in heaven. Please, help me... help me... (and at this point my mom
began to sit up and return to his side, and I placed my foot out to stop her
but she brushed by it) ... I am confused... bring me... (and at this point he
gave a pause noticably struggling to find the words that he wanted) ... help me
to understand what is going on. In Jesus name. Amen." and at the Amen, both my
mother and my aunt resounded with amen after that. And we all had a moment of
silence. And the parts I am sure of. I am sure he said Dear and heaven, and I
am not sure if he said Father or God, but I am pretty sure he said something to
that sytactical structure of Dear God, in Heaven.  Please was his next word.
What followed next was struggling, many pauses as he tried to find the words.
Then I know, after this stuggling he said his next phrase with clarity. Help me
to understand what is going on. Something very much like that, with the word
"understand" or a word like that, very close to that in syllabic difficulty.
That phrase followed by "in Jesus Name. Amen" all came out in succession
without inturruption.

This entire moment, as I said, had a profound impact on me. It was not until
that moment that I truly understood just how strong his faith is. It only makes
sense to me that a man so strong and steadfast as he would have a faith to
match, as I know his faith is important to him, but I did not see it, I had not
witnessed it, until that moment. What praticularly struck me in that moment was
that, in his so very compromised state, in the state of being where he has been
beaten, transfused, druged, injected with chemo, and brought to what could
possibly be his lowest point of physical well being, this is what he was able
to conjure up, the most words he had been able to put together since the
Aphesia started. And as I say, that moment struck me, and made an ever so
subtle shift in that conversation, and my treatment of that visit, from that
point on.

To fathom that only an hour before I was debating about whether or not I wanted
to visit! How great an error it would have been to fail in that moment, to have
decided to, instead of visit, continue with my idle tasks of lonesome
occupation. I may have missed this moment, this entire visit! How fickle this
thing we call life is.

Well, I do entirely forget what happened immediately after that. Indeed the
whole timeline of the visit is, even now only a day later, a bit muddled, but
what makes the most sense as to what happened would be at this point, my father
mentiond that he wanted to sleep. So we let him back to sleep.

Also, at this point, I finished my story at the Bovarian grill. Indeed, I don't
entirely remember how the two conversations interwove between eachother, but
that is that.

So that is the scene at this point, my dad, having made his prayer, returned to
sleep, and Linda and mom and I returned to our conversation, continuing talking
about medical things and my fathers conditions, and we were all uplifted a bit
at the fact that he was speaking more words than he had before, and that he was
seeming to much more easily put together his thoughts.

So after we three had conversed a bit, and my father continued to sleep, (there
was a bit of a shaking in his arm in his sleep that worried both my mom and my
aunt) at some point the nurse came in. At this, my father woke, and there was a
bit of back and forth about having a sponge bath, and cleaning my father (who
is mostly incontinent at this point) and some back and forth about "sure, go
ahead and do it" and "no I'd rather sleep" we decided to leave the room while
the nurses did their sponge bath and cleaning duties.

So now, at this point in the hall, we had the conversation in the hall. There
are a couple things to remark about this conversation. The first and primary
has to do with the sequence of events, and the second which I will talk about
first was the meeting of the nurse Payton. Payton, a nurse whose name I know
because last time I visited she was mentioned as a good nurse, whose name we
can remember "like the football player" as my dad said only a week ago was
walking through the hall just as we happened to be visiting. She saw my mom,
and asked how he was doing, to which my mom said, "not as well as we would
hope" at which Payton, being a good nurse that she is, immediately understood
and asked "may I give you a hug" The nurse and my mom shared a hug, and Payton
said, "I hope I am not overstepping my bounds but I am praying for you." And my
mom said, "no of course, not at all, and thank you." and the nurse went on
through the hall to wherever she was going. I mention this only because it was
the trigger for my crying moment which happened later in the car, which will be
described in its proper place.

The first thing had to do with the sequence of events. So I prefaced this by
mentioning that I visited my father the week before, and he was, while
certainly beaten down by the events, he was very lucid and we had a very nice
conversation while I was there, which I talked about in an earlier article. I
then mentioned that I know you my mother mentioned nightmares, but I didn't
realize exactly what state he was in, and I wanted a timeline of events. So my
mom told me about the nightmare which happened Thursday evening, which she
described as him being in the desert, wanting to get everyone out, all of us,
he needed to get everyone out, and he couldn't move on from the desert until he
did, and he woke up and Linda described that he was parched, absolutely
parched, which was because of the dialysis of his kidneys he was not supposed
to drink as much water, but she gave him some water and comforted him, and the
fitfullness of that night is some time around when they think he had the
stroke. The aphasia has been present since then. I then asked when Linda first
started taking care of him, and she said it was that very same night, and
immediately without thinking, I said in jest "So you triggered it" at which I
immediately realized that my jest probably had quite a lot of truth in it, and
Linda immediately replied that she probably did, and that seeing her there, him
being confused at having her there, and etc, were giving him a strong sense
that he was on his death bed. And she wanted just one good night, and so far
she was 0-3, and she just wants one good night with him while she is there.

Well, that was the two most important things of that conversation in the
hallway. I swear at this rate I will never be able to say what I want to say in
the time I have, but I will continue to do my best. Writing is hard and I am
thankful that I have begun this endeavor.

So, we got word from the nurses that we could return, and so we did. Shortly
after returning, we continued to interact with my dad, and I remember him
mentioning that he had to pee, and after some mild difficulty in communication,
my mom asked if she should get the urinal, and he replied that yes, she should,
and she got the urinal, and I looked away, and I knew that he was able to pee
in the urinal, which seems like such a minor thing, but seemed like a victory
to me, since they wanted to get some urine from him for testing and that they
were able to get some was a good thing.

Shortly after this, my mom made her goodbyes, making sure that it was okay with
my dad before she did, and both mom and Linda made sure that he was okay with
that before she left. I had a moment where I thought about seeing her out, but
I decided it best to stay there with my father for the time, and to go and see
my mom on my way out of the hospital entirely.

So my mom made her leave, as I said, and at this point it is just me and dad
and Linda in the room. And pretty soon after my mom left, my dad said something
like, after saying that he was sure that he was okay with my mom getting some
rest, said something like "I just having this feeling like, everything is good,
and I'm done" and he trailed off on the words "I'm done".

And at this point something happened which will again stick with me forever.
Indeed this entire night will stick with me forever, but this is another
moment. As soon as he trailed off with "I'm done" my immediate impulse was "I
wonder what he means by I'm done right now" since words, espically words like
"I'm done" can have so many different meanings in different contexts, and I was
curious what he train of thought might have gone to, but Linda immediately
started to go off on "no your not done, you still have quite a lot and we all
love you" and etc etc, and all of those sorts of things which I won't try and
begin to detail out here since I could not do the ramblings of a woman justice.
Ramblings of women that they have such an uncanny ability to overwhelm you with
and take you with and make you so overcome with almost awe as you lose your
sense of presence and their words and sounds almost become like noise, noise
that you can hear and comprehend but at the same time come into the ears as a
sort of white noise that become drowned out into a realm of processing that I
can't even begin to fathom. No, I will not try and recreate the words she said,
but suffice it to say, the principle thing was, in this conversation (and
praise be to women for this, because without it she would not have sparked this
moment between my father and I which led to the kiss which I will never forget)
my father asked her "are you worried" which set her off on another one of these
ramblings about her worry and she is only worried if he is worried, and she
talked with Doctor V who told her this and that about his condition, and that
this is a hard time, and so on and so on, and she ended up asking him in the
whole thing if he was worried. And when she asked that, he looked at me,
directly and unmistakably at me, and we made eye contact (I had been looking at
him this whole time, but our eyes finally met here) and asked me "are you
worried." And I smiled, and said the most resolute, the most peaceful and
genuitne "no" that I have ever said in my life. Worry was not in me at all in
that moment. And at this, my father replied to Linda, "Then I am not worried".
And at this Linda somewhat began to continue her speech, but mostly concluded
with "well I'm glad, that's good" in her most womenly way.

I then said something which was great in that moment. I said, "women have a
tendancy to worry." At first this was heard as "You have a tendance to worry."
and my father asked "I do?", and I said, "No, not you, wo-men" and I
articulated out the word like that to be sure I was understood correctly. At
this, something miraculous happened. My father laughed. He laughed the sort of
laugh that I know him for, the laugh that I have heard all through my
childhood, through my youth and my teenage years and even the years I hated
him. He laughed that genuine laugh that I inherited from him. And I laughed
with him, that inherited laugh, him and I together, and he said "my brother, my
brother" and he held out his fist to give me a fist bump and I sat up and
returned the bump, and he said "Thank you" "Thank you" as if I had lifted from
him something that he only wished he could articulate but needed me to do it
for him. And at this Linda said, "Well, I will try not to be offended" and she
took her place in the seat. And I added on, "well, we love you for it anyway."
and my father agreed with an "amen to that".

That was a sort of turning point to the whole visit. I think it was at this
moment, that we had a few fleeting conversations. One was about golf, that had
been playing on the tv this whole time, and Linda said she recognized one of
the names, and I said the only female golfer I know is Anica Sorrenstein, who I
think doesn't play anymore. And then I mentioned also "and of course, Julie
Pyne," and this got a smile out of my father who I was glad recognized the
name.

Another conversation had to do with fireworks. I asked if he got to see the
fireworks, and my father said yeah, and then I asked him how the view was, and
he said it sucked, (my mom had said the the fireworks on the fourth happened
behind a building and they couldn't see them, but the ones on the third
happened in plain view, so I thought maybe he would recall those and not the
foruth ones, but I was mistaken) and to that I said, "well, what can you do"
and my father said "nothing" and I said that's right.

I don't remember the exact timeline of this, but my father then asked me how it
was that I wasn't worried. To this I replied simply that I am not. He then
began to say something like "Well, that's good to me, because I am not either,
but I have this strong feeling like I am sitting here, and I am happy, and I'm
here, and I feel like, it's over" and that he said with a final period on it,
and thank god Linda had the wisdom to see the moment between he and I there,
and she remained silent. He then asked me, "do you not feel that". And I said I
don't. But then I added on "But it's not in my hands, and its not in your
hands, its in the hands of ..." and at this I paused, I wanted to say the
universe, I wanted to say "that which is beyond us" but both of those things I
knew were not phrases that he could understand, and after the pause (which was
ever so breif) I said "it's in God's hands what happens here."

And truely I tell you, from this moment forward in the conversation, we
maintained eye contact. He said, "yes its in the hands of God," and I said
right. And he continued like that, and we maintained eye contact, uncomfortable
but unwavering eye contact, and we continued on this conversation, which was
probably way shorter than I remember, because truely let me tell you that this
moment, this connection between my father and I felt to last for an entire
eternity, if you forgive the cliche. It felt like time stood still and we hung
there, each seeing the truth in the eyes of the other. But I'm only human, and
I was still uncomfortable with my use of the word god, and my father saw that,
he saw that there was a smile, and he asked me to speak my thoughts. And I
said, "I just, I think you don't know that what I say is genuine" and we
struggled on the word genuine for a bit, but I repeated it slowly and he got
it, and he said he knew it was, and that he was glad that I was right with God.
And I replied that he asked me to speak my thoughts. Finally, Linda
inturrupted, while my dad and I maintained eye contact, and she gave her two
cents about God and how this is in God's hands, and such and such, but dad and
I looked at eachother, and I stayed fixed on his gaze.

Then I started to see through him, see him like glass, (from my journals in
seattle, the man who wanted to join the army, what he said to me when we made
eye contact in that moment), and I saw his stare start to widen. I maintained
the eye contact, until I gave him a wink, at that I can only say it was because
I felt that such a long prolonged manner of eye contact had to be uncomfortable
at some point no matter how profound a moment precipitated it, and I broke the
contact (indeed, his gaze probably broke before I broke contact). And then he
said something like, "I don't know what to do now, maybe sleep." To which I
replied, "Or maybe eat". "Yes, or maybe eat." and then I said, "Or maybe watch
golf." and he said "No, not that" and looked away, not at the TV but just away.

So I sat there for another few moments, but I had seen the moment, it had
passed, and I took notes from my previous visit to make then, so I stood up,
and looked at my father, and announced my intention to leave "Well, I think I'm
going to leave now" or something equally as cumbersome. I stepped up to my
fathers bedside, and he raised his hand out to me, a gesture which even in his
weakest state he continues to make for me, and I took his hand and held it. And
at this, I began to bow my head to him, at first to his shoulder, but then I
felt how strange that gesture was, so I began to move my lips, covered by the
mask, towards his forehead to kiss him, but hesitated as I realized he was
pursing his lips to kiss me, and we met somewhat in the middle, and breifly,
between the safety of the mask, we kissed eachother on the lips. For the first
and only time, we kissed on the lips. We exchanged I love you's, and I ended by
saying, "You told you me would get better" to which he said "I will" and I said
"Good." I removed my hand, and I hugged Linda who was there, and she said
"You're a good man Brett" and I said "Thank you" in response, but also in a way
thanking her, and we shared I love yous. And I made my way. I took a bow as I
left the room, and made my way down the hall, in a state of nearing tears.

As I went down the elevator, I determined that this was not the spot to let
myself break into tears. It was not, and I knew it when the doors opened on
floor 6 and I had this moment where no one got in, and I held the door open,
seeing a family out there in the hall of floor 6, and after holding it for a
good twenty seconds, the mom there said "you can go" and I resumed going down.

When I made it to my car, I remember having a resolve to go to my mom. I
quickly thought through the best route to get there, and started my engine and
made my way out of the garage. Needless to say my head was spinning with
thoughts, and I was on the verge of tears, but knew they wouldn't come if I
tried to conjure them, so I let myself drive in that state. My thoughts at this
point are not worth noting here as they are the same thoughts I am detailing
out just now. I played through the whole visit, in it's pieces, and I thought
through the conversation I knew I would have with my mom. I thought about her
attachments, of her worries, and all of that, and knew that that is what the
conversation would have to come to.

Also on the road, I got a very strange imagary of the signage there, I thought
about how deplorable the advertising was, as if our super organism had produced
this, and how despisable it was. Regardless, I saw this in all the sort of
beauty that I have been trying to see all things of late, and I let it pass as
you have to let such beauty pass. I just saw the signs similar to the way I saw
them on mushrooms, but without the out of body experience of psychodelics.

And, as I was on the interchange from 635 to 75, I thought about Payton, the
nurse. I thought about her soul, what I great soul it was, and I thought about
a hypothetical conversation that I could have with her about my father, about what she saw in
my father, and what it was that made her so attached to him and my mother. And
as I was thinking about that conversation, in my humanness, in my baseness, I
played out very quickly the fantasy that maybe her and I would connect and we
could date and that would be how I would meet "her" the "her" of my life. And
all of this was quite innocent, but then I thought, in comparison to my father,
why would she be interested in someone like me, someone so wretched and
contempable as myself. And at that, it let loose. The tears flew as I came down
that interchange. That word "contempable" stuck in my mind, as the word that
triggered it. I had to manage the emotions of my tears with my duties as a
driver. I did not seek to stop the tears as I only knew that would make it
worse, and so I drove and merged and breathed and let the tears flow. I let it
all flow through me, in the silence of my own car, I let the tears flow on
their own, and I only thought about not rear-ending the car in front of me or
making sure to check my blind spot as I merged. And on the highway, I saw a
man with a broken down car on the side of the road, and thought maybe I should
seek to be a good samaritan and stop, but then I thought "what could a wretched
unhandy fool like me do to help this man, he would be better off if I didn't
stop and he probably had AAA or a friend or someone already on the way, and I
can't help him," and that only made the tears flow more. And I knew I was in a
severely compromised driving state, so I focused on the safety of the road
above all else. And there was a moment, when I wanted to get infront of a car
before turning right, but I thought, "why should I get in front of him?" He is
already in front. Who am I to get in front of this car only to slow him down as
I turn? So I slowed myself to his speed, and got behind him, and made my turn
towards the street that leads to my parents house from the highway. And in that
two mile stretch of surface road, I gathered myself back together, let the last
of the tears flow out, and turned to my neighborhood road, and parked where I
do outside my parents.

Upon arriving at my parents, I heard my mom talking to what I correctly
assumed was Granny and Papa on the phone, so I made my way into the kitchen,
opened the fridge, and found some pulled BBQ that I took out, showed to her to
ask if I could eat some, to which she said yes, and I put some in a bowl and
ate it. I saw some mashed potato mix on the counter as well. After eating the
beef I waited for my mom to get off the phone, and said that after we ate, I
wanted to take her on a walk. I then went into Evan's room, and just made my
appearance. He was watching a speed run from SGDQ, but he paused it and came
out when I showed up. We ate some food, and the only really notable thing that
happened at this dinner, besides having cordial conversation as one might
in such a situation, was that, when I went to clean all of the dishes, I
started cleaning them all out, and the disposal wasn't draining properly. That
is something that I know has happened before, and could be cleared out with a
snake if it doesn't clear properly, but I don't know how to use a snake, and
was always one of those things that dad would handle, but of course he wasn't
there, and I dare not say anything of the sort, and mom brought out a business
card of a plumber that she knew that she might call to fix it, and I felt that
somehow that that was wrong but didn't know how to feel about the whole thing.

After we had finished, we then returned to the topic of the walk, and my mom
asked if this is the sort of walk that Evan would be invited to. I then said
no, at which point we then went back and forth about Evan feeling rejected and
such, and I gave him a hug and said I did feel bad, but that I wanted to walk
on our own. Evan gave me a hard time about it of course, but that was how I
wanted it to be. My mom then asked me if it would be a hard walk, and I said no
even though I knew that probably wasn't the case, but yeah.

Anyway, as we started the walk, I mentioned the tire that is flat on my back
right of my car, and that I had ulterior motive for coming here, that I wanted
to use the air compressor. So we made note of that to resolve it after the
walk. We then stared, and I honestly don't remember how the entire walk
started. By the time we got to Drake and Tulane though, only 200 meters in, I
had managed to move the conversation to where I wanted it. In fact, I think it
started with us talking about the rest of the visit, which led right in to
where I wanted it to go. And I said this.

I had never seen it before, but I saw it now, and I know it to be true. Dad's
faith is strong, and it's his faith that will get him through this. And I told
my mom that I mean that, that I'm not just saying it, but that I really do
truely believe that. I then went on to talk about my thoughts on God, and
religion, and I said it is undeniable that there is something of truth in it,
but that because of that it has been polluted, polluted by greedy and corrupt
people, talking about the church, and the bible, and everything that people
say. And I made clear that while I think things like the 6000 years or the fact
that some being snapped his fingers and it all came in a poof is absurd, but
that still there is a truth in the concepts, of God, of Faith, of Sacrifice and
surrender. Those are all powerful things, and that I never realized, never
witnessed, just how strong it is in dad.

To this, we then talked back and forth a bit about the whole topic. To be
totally honest, I thought I would have more to say about this right now as I am
writing, but I don't. But we got to a point in the conversation where we had a
sort of breaking point, after the 1000 meter mark on our 1600 meter path, where
I asked my mom and I asked her if I could ask a personal question. She said
sure, and I asked her, when she prays, and I know you do because I know you,
what do you pray for. And at this she said that she isn't always sure of what
to pray for, sometimes she prays for healing, and other times she prays for
gods will. And after the 1200 meter mark, when she had sort of finished about
those things regarding my father, I asked what she prays about when she prays
about herself. And she said she prays for his wisdom, and that she prays for
her judgemental attitude (which surprised me honestly) and that she prays for
gods will to come in her, and to protect her. And at that, as we were nearing
the end of the walk, I asked if she ever prays for surrender. And I prefaced at
that point, saying that I don't want to come off as some sort of righteous
fool, as if I have all the answers, and she said I wasn't and that yes, she
does. I then mentioned that something that comes from eastern philosphy,
because there is truth in Eastern philosophy as well, and a concept that is
also prevalent throughout Christanity, is about letting go of attachments,
letting go of worldly things that we hold on to, and surrendering yourself to
our own mortality, because that is the fate of all things, is our mortality.
And I said that I see her, the love she has for everything, but I also see
attachment, that she has very strongly, and at this she recoiled a bit, and
said that yes, that is something she thinks very strongly about, and that she
was a bit surprised that that was what was on my mind. And as we rounded the
corner back into the backyard, I said that dad's faith will get him through
this, but also your faith will as well, and that I pray that she should pray
for her surrender, that she might let go of her attachment to her own worry and
anxiety, that she may trust whatever "God's plan" may be. And she told me that
she does, and that eased my heart, and I told her that.

When we circled back into the backyard, we wrapped up our disscussion rather
quickly with me describing my dreams the dreams I had. The moment that struck
me the most was, and what took me a few minutes to articulate in the backyard
was, that my felony charge arrived I think at a very ideal time. That the
situation of it was as ideal as it could have been, that I got caught in Denton
and not in Trinidad, that I had that day off of work already, that I'm not
addicted to marijuana nad can easily stop smoking, that I have the income to
pay for a lawyer who can get it expunged, that everything lined up so
perfectly. And in as much as I believe in a "God's plan" (and I used air quotes
describing it to my mom), that charge must be a part of "God's plan" because
when I smoke marijuana, I don't have dreams, but now that I am not smoking, I
am having dreams again, beautiful dreams, and dad is in these dreams, and he is
perfectly well. Now I said that I don't know what that means, because it could
very easily just mean that my memories of dad are from when he is well and that
that could be all that this means, but without the felony charge, I would be
smoking marijuana again, and I wouldn't be having these dreams.

At that, we shared our hug, the long hug that we had to share in that moment,
and after that hug I said that I wanted to write a caring bridge post. I still
need to write it, and will after my chiropracter appointment. Regardless, we
swapped the cars, and I put air in the tire. I then returned inside, washed my
hands, and shared our final conversation of concluding words with mom and Evan
inside, as I shared my final thoughts. In those final thoughts, I mentioned
to treat every moment in the hospital with dad as if he is there. Don't talk as
if he isn't there. My mom then said that, well, that's what we were doing, and
I wasn't so sure, but she got a little defensive at that, and I receded,
calling myself a righteous fool again, before we shared our final hugs for that
day and I drove back to my place.


Caring Bridge Post

So lately I have felt inspired to write here about my father, partly to give
some relief to my mom, who has been amazingly supportive of my father in this
journey, and has been the sole informant as to his well being towards the
world, but also because I feel driven by something inside me to speak to
everyone who might be so compelled to listen. Call it the Holy Spirit if you
like, or choose to leave it unnamed as I do, whatever it is compells me to
speak about my father.

It's easy to read these posts, and to get updates on Jerry's health, and to
read it as "we did such-and-such treatment on so-and-so day and Jerry's
condition is X, Y and Z" when really there is so much more underlying what is
going on. We can talk about his physical condition, and label it it however we
like, (and it is true, that from a pragmatic stance his current state is not
well) but when it comes the actual condition of my father, I have visited him,
and I can see that he is not defined by his physical state. He is much more
than that, and he always has been, and I've known that to be true. It's
easy to disregard that, and put it behind the shield of good health, but when
that good health leaves us, we are left with our barest being, or naked soul,
to be judged before god, what is left of my Father I see to be an unshakable
faith.

In all of this, in all of the transfusions, chemotherapy, and a bunch of other
things, when a man is striped down to his basic he is left to face the rapture
and gates of Hell, and in that, I what is left of my father is his faith, and
his love of his family. Both of those things are what is left of him of him at this
compromised physical state, and I know it in my heart that if he can make it
through this, it will be his faith that pulls him through.

I am one that is can so easily get caught up in the facts of things to
disregard the truth, the truth that deep down in all of us there is this
undeniable thing we all share, and that thing gets lost in the turmoils of life
and the stresses of the world, but when faced with the greatest stress, when we
are all brought to the mortality that we all share, I see in my father a faith
which is strong, and if anything will bring him through to the other side of
this a reborn man, it is his faith.

I don't know how this ends, but no matter what I know that he is able to find
peace in his faith and in the love of everyone that cares for him.

None of us know what will the end result of this thing we call life, and it's
never about the destinations that we reach, but the steps that we make on the
journey. The thing is, most of us have the luxury of being able to  However,
most of us have the luxury of 
truth in it that we all share.

This entire
journey, this past eight months since the first diagnosis, is reaching a sort
of climax, and in that, none can say what will be the end result, but currently
I am compelled, perhaps by the Holy Spirit if those words mean anything to you,
to give a sort of fresh perspective. It's easy to see these posts, and see that
"such and such" treatment happen at "so and so" time and Jerry is responding in
xyz way to it, and in those details get lost in the moment and forget that this
entire thing is one big journey, and in this journey, how are we?  And that's
the whole thing for all of us, the journey of life that we all step through.
It should never be about the end destination, as much as we want to be able to
say words like "remission" and "cured", similar to words like "promoted" and
"happily retired" as a lot of us strive for, it's important to remember that
the end destination is never the goal.

I have visited my father, and, pragmatically speaking, if narrowing in on this
moment he is not well, but I can also say, with complete certainty, that these
steps that my father is on at this stage in his journey, he is taking with a
strength, with a faith, and a surrender to the will of God that, while I knew
it to exist to him, I have been so fortunate to witness. And in witnessing
that, I see that know matter what the end result of this entire journey is for
him, his steps, and his strength along this journey 

So I don't know how many people read this, or how many that do even know who I
am, but lately I have been inspired to write here about my father, and I asked
my mom who said she would post it if I did, so here it goes

I have felt inspired to write here about my dad, because I know a lot of these
posts can be about "a certain treatment happened today and this is how it went"
or about medical conditions, or other such things about the physical condition
of the state of my father, and I don't want to talk about that. Being informed
there is important, but among all of the numbers and the treatments, you can
still get lost in the details and still be left wondering "so how is he?"

I have recently visited my father, on what was day +12 of the bone marrow
transfusion, and you can say from a purely pragmatic standpoint he is not
well, but I can say I have seen something in him that I didn't know was there
and that I do truely firmly believe. When you strip him of his physical body,
take away his capabilities, beat him down with the potent and destructive drug
that is chemo, on top of all the other drugs they put in him to regulate
all of things we need in this thing we call life, and when take all of that
from him so that his physical body, strong though it is, is reduced to an
entire ecosystem of chemicals at war with itself, when you do all of that, what
remains in him is a strength, a strength that I have always known is there, but
did not truely appreciate until I was able to take witness to it, and see it in
his eyes. His strength, his faith in God, his love for those that love him,
those things are what's left, in their most bare and raw form, and seeing that,
I can say without doubt that his faith, if it's allowed to stay alive within
him, will bring him through this. I know that to be true. I never knew how
strong it was. I knew, but I had not truely seen witness to it. It's a
powerful force, and it will bring him through this, if it's allowed to flourish
like it needs. I truly believe that.


when he has been reduced to immeasurable rapture and suffering due to the
horrible (but unfortantely still our best known method) drug His faith is
there, and it is perhaps the strongest thing in him, his faith and his love for
those who love him, when all his bodily capabilities are taken away, and he's
taken down and reduced to.

Wow, what a mess of thoughts, I came into this post with the best of
intentions, but now I see that I must come back to it with a clearer mind. I
will return to this later, and from there see what it is I should do, to find
my inner spirit and let it write through me.


