# 20181006
Two dreams that I remember last night. The first was at Chuck and Michelles
dream house. Jac was up on the stairs, and I don't remember much about this
section. I do remember, eventually, after we got to open presents. The dreams
shifts to my parents place kitchen. I am attempting to set up my whole rig,
with laptop, two moniters, and a pc, to play a game in Vim, a FF remake that
was done in vim (I know it's weird). As I'm setting it up, I'm having trouble
with the setup (because it's fucking lunacy) and I try and move the screen
using the keyboard, but it keeps freezing and being all fucky. I then say that
it really is teh set up that is making this difficult, and I really like the
gift of FF redone in Vim to my grandparents who are sitting there and gave me
the gift of FF redone in vim, and I start to tear down my set up and move it to
the school room.

My parents mention how disrespectful it was to show off my game not working in
front of them, and how much of a disaster it was, and I told them again
(because it was true) that I was really excited about the game, and that it
really was the set up which was fucking with it. They still wanted none of it,
and I set it up in the school room and started playing.

Also, as an aside of this dream, Kyle was there two, and he agreed with me that
my set up was pretty bad, and that's why the game wasn't working as intended.
He also had is own game, FF OWL, or something like that, an ff game I have
never heard of before, and he had played through the introduction in the time I
was fucking with my set up.

The second dream was a case of something being mixed with it's opposite. So in
this dream, which took place first in a sort of beach locale, similar to pikes
place, but if pikes place had a legit beach, there is a husband and wife that
are pregant. I am with the wife at the beach, which is really the husband, but
takes the form of the wife, and she says that she is suspicious about her wife
(it's not lesbian, it's this weird mixing of opposites) because she found some
glasses. The last time they were pregnant, she had to get her abortion doctor
glasses, because he needed them. She then said that these glasses didn't make
sense. I then ask what happened to the abortion doctor, and she said that he
had quit, and he no longer practiced. She was seeing a regular doctor now. And
I said, "Oh, well these glasses have to be for her new abortion doctor, it
makes sense." She was skeptical, and didn't want to believe that her wife (not
lesbian still, just juxtopositon of husband and wife) would have another
abortion, and taht they had been through that.

So the scene jumps to the abortion clinic, where the wife who is pregnant is
getting ready for an abortion. She gives the doctor his glasses, and he starts
to describe the processes while taking out these crates. In the crates, he has
pairs of mice, and he says that it's okay, because they use mice now to help
the process along. The mice are tied together, at the shoulder. It's hard to
describe exactly how they are tied together, but it is entirely with their own
body parts. It's like the tail of one of the mice is tied into the shoulder of
another, in some sort of weird mutation or something, and it's teh process that
the mice have to go through to get them ready for teh procedure (which I liken
more to stem cells than to abortion at this point. It's another mixing up of
elements). The wife explains that her previous abortion doctor didn't use mice,
but the current doctor assures her that this is the way they do things now and
that it is teh ideal way to do it.

That's about the extent of both of these dreams.
