# 20180815
So today has been an interesting day so far. Let's just start with the
beginning.

Yesterday, in the evening, I might have talked about this in my last journal
entry, but I was planned to visit Liel for our language exchange. Well, we
visited, and we had a lovely time. The thing was, I did not have much material
to go over, as most of my Russian time was spent reading the story about the
sun and the sky, and making notes about it, but I was wholly ashamed of my
notes, and they didn't reveal much anyway, and well, we spent most of the
Russian time going over that story, which was somewhat constructive, but not as
much as it could be.

I have decided that, while I will still analyze these stories like this, I must
do so in a more constructive way. Not only that, but I should also take it much
slower, going one sentence at a time, and each day, picking two words from a
sentence, and writing other sentences to match. These created sentences, and
maybe even the ones from the story, I will memorize by writing them and
rehearsing them at the end of the day. So the analysis will still be there, but
the "two words a day" will be I think what has to be the more primary
motivation.

So enough of that.

Let's talk about last night. So I had two dreams, actually three now that I
think about it, last night. The first dream I know took place at the dream
version of Disney World. I know that there was a lot to this dream, but I do
not remember much of any of it at this time, for a couple of reasons. The first
reason is because, as I woke up, I decided I would lay in bed and continue to
take cat naps until late in the morning. Today is a Wednesday, and I should
have met with Paco in the morning, but I didn't because I just wanted to lie
there and do nothing, and sleep more. I curled up on my right side, and I
continued to sleep. And in this sleep I had two fleeting dreams which wholly
made me forget this dream that took place in dream Disney World.

I will say, the one thing I do remember about the dream was that I remember
thinking "why has there not been any of the shows of the Magic Kingdom on this
visit, and I remember my mom saying it was because this time we just got Epcot
passes" That, and I also remember there was something to do with a ride. Either
we were waiting in line, or something else, I don't remember. It was
significant, but I think it is gone forever.

So, as I took the catnaps, I remember another more fleeting dream, that had to
do with taking a bath/shower in my parents place. I remember, I took a shower
in my parents shower, and as I got out, Dad and Mom and Kyle were discussing
the ways that they take a bath. Dad mentioned, in a sort of chuckly way, that
both Kyle and Mom like to draw the bath, and then work themselves to the edge
of the bath, and then get in, where as he and I like to just jump in as the
bath is being drawn. My instinct says that this has something to do with my
conception of water now in dreams representing something (I heard that in one
of Peterson's lectures) and so I am putting together the association of that
with my conception of how both mom and Kyle treat chaos in the world. That is
my interpretation.

The last dream I think was the most interesting. It was at the dream version of
the camp, which is very much like the old camp before it was restructured, and
in the dream version it connects to their neighbors to a big bridge highway
structure and such. Well, in the dream, I remember there was a car salesman,
and he was showing me the variety of cars on his lot. In the dream I was in the
business of getting a new car, and he was trying to sell them to me. Well, he
showed me all of the cars, and I saw them, and they were nice and all, but I
was looking for a Miata, and there was no Miata. There was, I remember, a
Porsche, similar to my dads, but a newer model, and I remember considering
that, but as I thought about it, I decided that that was not what I wanted. I
then remember Papa being there, and he said something there, like "which one
are you going to get." and I said that I don't think these are the cars that I
want. Something like that, I honestly don't remember. I then remember going
down to the bluff and on to the pier, and there were people, a bunch of people,
friends of my cousins and Aunt and Uncle (which on any given day there might
be) playing and relaxing on the pier, and I went out there, and dove into the
water. I remember being in the water, and it was clear enough to see, but I
wanted to swim to somewhere, and I had no idea where, and I sort of just looked
around. It was then I woke up.

When I woke up I checked the time and found that it was past 8. A good five
minutes past 8. I lay there for a little longer, and said to myself, "Do I want
to get fired? Are the gates of hell so inviting?" Something like that. I have
been in this sort of mood for the past couple of days. Very unmotivated, very
depressive. I am not sure how to deal with it. You would think, in the years
that I did deal with it, I would be better equiped to know what to do when it
comes, but I think the best thing is to just let it pass, and do the best to
fake it while it happens. But clearly, this morning I was not in a faking it
mood.

I have not been to Bjj in the past couple days, and like I said, I had decided,
as I was waking up (I woke up quite in time to legitamately wake up and go to
class) I had decided to be a piece of shit and not wake up. I decided to keep
sleeping. I had these two more dreams, which wholly masked my I think more
interesting dream about Epcot and Disney, but more so, what happened next was
this.

After I finally decided to get out of bed and get ready for the morning and not
be a piece of shit, I got in the shower, and I took a shower, and I got out,
brushed my teeth, and began putting on my clothes. I put my clothes on, and was
then remembering to prepare some avocado for lunch. So I took out the avocado,
and started to cut it. I had two pieces of Avocado. One was ripe, and cut
easily, and decored easily, and everything about it just went all fine and
dandy. The second one cut easily, but it didn't split easily, and as I split
it, some of the avocado stuck to the core. This avocado was clearly less ripe.
Still, it was not wholly unripe, it was just less ripe, and so I knew it could
be prepared. It was fine. So I ate a little bit of the avocado that was
sticking to the core, and as I went to pierce the pit of the avocado, to remove
it like I do, I knew I would have to pierce it a little more than usual. Well,
I started to pierce it, and as I did, the outside of the core provided a lot of
resistance, so I pressed into it really hard, and as I did, the knife became
suddenly much less resistant, and it went straight through the core, and I
ended up stabbing myself in the left hand.

As soon as this happened, I had that moment of quick denial. "No, that didn't
just happen, my hand is okay." Well, I turned over my hand, and looked at my
palm, and as I did, I heard the blood from my hand hit the floor. I saw the
cut, and I saw the blood, and that denial quickly went away. I grabbed the rag
from my counter, and used it to cover my hand. I applied pressure, and from
there, I started to run through what I needed to do. More, actually, I was
diagnosing the damage.

The first thing I thought was, "did I hit a tendon or arterie" I felt it a bit,
and I let a little pressure off, and I felt my heartbeat in it a bit, but it
didn't feel like it was attached to the hand, but that it was just there. Well,
I looked at it, and I saw that it was bleeding when I removed the presure, but
I determined that it was not spurting, so that was good. The second thing I
did, after I reapplied pressure, was move my fingers. I moved all of them on my
left hand, and determined that I did not hit a tendon at all, and that
everything was all dandy on that front.

After having determined that I hit nothing of significant importance, I then
went through my options. As I looked at the wound, I determined that it was a
decent wound, and that it needed attention. There was a part of me that didn't
want to go to an urgent care place, but as I thought about it, I determined
that it would be wise to. I assumed it probably needed stitches. I chuckled at
this. I would have a perfect excuse for being late to work. What a charming
coincdence.

Having read some Freud now, I must say that I do whole heartedly believe that
this was the pinicle of the "Freudian slip". It is the strongest manifestation
of such a slip. I think, while you could argue that it might have been "simply
an accident" (and I do think that this surely was an accident, as I had no
knowledge of the unripe avocado before I went to get it.) there must be some
level of Freudian psychology going on here. I have a case at work that I don't
like, and I am not sure what to do with, I have been reluctant to go to Bjj
lately, and have fallen into a depressive mood, and generally what is most on
my mind more than I care to admit is that I just want to curl up in a ball, and
sleep, and do nothing but sleep and maybe read or whatever for like a week.

Anyway, I ended up getting my things, getting in my car, and driving myself to
the urgent care on MacArthur near Kroger. I walked in, explained what was going
on, and the doctor there gave me stitches and everything. She did a very good
job, and I got six stitches total, and everything was fine and dandy. I got a
tetinus shot, and then I made my way out of there. I called Nick while I was
there, and told him what was up, and that was that.

It hurts now, and typing is a bit of a bitch, especially when I have to use my
left pointer finger. I have adopted using right shift to make capitals, and in
general, I am avoiding typing with my left hand as much as possible. That is,
when you are typing, you can't really avoid using your left hand, but I am
keeping my tying to a minimum.

I say that, but I just typed 160 lines with this beat up hand, so what the fuck
am I talking about.

That's all I have for now. I need to get to work. With the fucked up hand I
actually feel like doing actual work, so that is good. I feel as though I will
be able to focus and get the work that needs to be done done. I have this
attitude of slow and steady right now, and typing has been that way, and it
seems as thought it hasn't been very effected. 
