So last night, I had something of a dream fragment. It wasn't quite a dream
fragment but it wasn't quite a full dream either, and how much I remember it
makes it closer to a fragment than a full on dream.

So it took place in a large outdoor area. There was some sort of convention
going on, and there were tents set up, and picnic tables, and all sorts of
stuff. I was helping with the convention, it had something to do with
maintaining property. In other words, the convention was something like a
landscaping convention, like a volunteer thing that was like a "get the
community together and help out" sort of thing.

All I really remember about the dream is that, at the end of the day as the sun
was coming down, we went into the tents, and I was hanging out with some of the
people there, and I was asked if I would like a beer. I said, "Yes, I would
love a beer" and I thought about how good a beer is after doing yardwork. I
grabbed a bottle of beer, and openned it and started sipping it, when I
remembered that I was still not allowed to have beer on the FODP. I looked at
my watch, and the date was the 28th, and I thought, "Uh oh, hopefully I'm not
going to be asked to test at the beginning of February, that would be bad." and
I thought I would hopefully have enough of a buffer to make it.

That was the extent of what I remember about the dream. I think there was more
to the dream about someone speaking at the main podium, but I don't remember
that, or what he said, or anything like that. It could also not be part of the
dream, so I don't know. That was all I remember.

--

So I just finished the Moral Landscape, and I must say that I am somewhat
intrigued by the concept that Harris has put forth within it. It's getting
late, on Friday, and I am preparing myself to leave and go to BJJ soon, but I
wanted to get a quick word in before I do.

So there are a couple things to mention about it that I'm not so sure of. The
first is that I would like to have a better definition about what something
like Well-Being would entail. I think it is similar to something like "good
health" which is a useful concept for talking to unhealthy people about some of
the tennants of medicine and disease, but just talking about medical conditions
in terms of good health is rather misleading I think. For instance, to talk
about performing a bypass surgery would require intricate understanding of the
heart and everything else that goes in to performing such a task, and to boil
it down to something like "health" I think really undermines the work that
medical professionals do when studying the effects and ramifications of a
surgery of that sort, not to talk about the skill required in execution.

I suppose the point is more that, in today's moral climate, we are not even
inclined to think about something like "the well-being of humanity" in these
sorts of terms, and we think that something like a science of well-being is
either impossible, or that it can only be found through revelation.

I think, the whole point of Sam's work is put onto the shoulders of how it is
that we define human well being, and it's not entirely clear to me that there
is a satisfactory definition. It's elusive, like health, in trying to define,
so I think some other way of talking about it would have to be more benificial.

Like, in a bypass surgery, we have to talk about the exact ventricles of teh
heart, the positions of teh artiries, and a bunch of other things taht I don't
know about because I'm not a doctor, and and those things don't really have to
do with the health of the patient per se. It has more to do with the physical
processes that go into the body, and so in order to create a science around
this, we need to more clearly understand the physical processes that go on with
our society.

The other thing that I would like to comment on is that Harris doesn't really
touch on many topics that have to do with what I consider to be laying the
framework for how a scientific approach to morality would take place? In
science, we perform experiments, but when it comes to something like ethics,
even the ethics of experimentation comes in to play. It's a weird recursive
problem.

But even beyond that, I suppose what gets me is that I still feel like it's
really difficult to come up with a version of well-being that covers everything
in the real world.

What I have a hard time envisioning is what the virvana of well being would
look like. Like, what does it begin to look like as the level of well-being
continues to go to infinity? It's hard to say.

Anyway, I'm going to get to BJJ now, I'll be back to talk more about this
later.
