# 20180706 Injury at open mat, decision to not go to Houston, condemnatiion of Bikram
Okay, so as of this moment in time, it is in the afternoon, I am conflicted. So
today is Friday, and like any good Friday I decided to go to open mat. Well,
while I was at open mat, I rolled with a lot of people, as I do, and I tapped
to every one of them. That is, I went in with the intention of learning rather
than the intention of trying to tap people. Well, I must be a moron, because my
very last roll, I rolled with a guy, and I wish I could remember his name, it
was something unique, but for the life of me I can't remember, but regardless,
I rolled with him, and at first, by his demeanor and the way he was holding
himself, I thought him to be a brown belt or at least purple belt, but as I
started rolling with him I found a lot of holes in his game, he seemed
unconfident in his guard top game, and I ended up in closed guard quite easily,
and I was able to manipulate his limbs quite at my whim. Well, at this point I
went for an armbar, and it was quite deep, but he was able to get a good gable
grip to save it, and at that point I could have really pulled on it to try and
finish it, but I decided it wasn't worth the time, so I returned to guard and
kept playing. I was able to break his posture, and play with him, and at that
moment I felt as though I could do some super cool spinny shit that I was
literally just making up on the spot. So I sat up, to do the super cool spinny
shit, but he stood up as well and we ended up standing and my super cool spinny
shit ended with me in turtle and him attacking my back. Well, that is obviously
not where I wanted to be, but we played there for most of the match, me trying
to do things from turtle, and he made it to side mount but it was a sort of
shitty side mount (in comparison to Troy earlier who had me in a very strong
side mount that ended with a head in arm choke that almost put me to sleep) and
I was able to recover guard easily. And so we are back in guard, and I hear the
thirty second buzzer, and that is when my ego kicked in. I thought about how
much this guy must think I suck, because he was attacking me from turtle the
entire time, and I thought about how, if this were a match, he would have been
up for sure on points, and I felt again the arm bar, so I went for it again. It
was the same arm as the first one, and he saved himself with the same gable
grip, but it felt deep, and it was the end of the round, so this one I decided
to really pull on, and I pulled on it for quite some time, and as I was pulling
on it, just before the final time went off, I felt something in my spine right
where it meets the hip come out of place. I have felt it before many months ago
going for a triangle on the big guy whose name is escaping me, and this time
was no different. Well, I came back to guard, but I immediately knew that I had
pulled some kind of muscle in my low back there, and the time stopped maybe 5
seconds later, and I thanked him as best I could and went to turtle to try and
alleviate the pressure. I then hobbled to the restroom, took my shower, and did
my best to move as slowly as possible so as not to hurt it.

I tell of this story for a few reasons. One, it goes to show that as much as I
think my ego is gone, it still decides to intrude itself, and it always does so
in these awful ways that end with some aspect of my body getting hurt. Two, I
was just thinking about only yesterday how grateful I am to be young, and how
grateful I am that my body can recover from my foolishness so well, and how
important it is to train for my fifty year self rather than my tomorrow self.
How ironic that this would happen not even 24 hours after that thought. Three,
I have entirely reconsidered going to Houston for the Fourth celebration.

You see, this morning, only this morning, I have packed all of my things, and
arranged it all nice and neat in my bags, and gotten a few pairs of underwear,
and some jeans, and some sleep shorts, and all of the other assorted things
that go into packing for a trip that would last one day and two nights. I even
went back to my apartment after this mornings training with Paco, and grabbed
some towels which I had forgotten, and a fresh gi in case I wanted to visit an
open mat in Houston on Saturday. I have everything prepared, and the plan was
this morning to leave for Houston immediately after work. Now, though, I have
entirely reconsidered that plan, for a few reasons. The first and most
practical is, I very much do not want to drive in the car with my low back in
the state that it is right now. Not only will it not be comfortable, but also
it will not be the best idea to constrain myself to that level of treatment to
something which is important. Indeed, if I am careful about it and treat it
well, by back will be mostly recovered by the morning, with proper care and
mobility treatment, but if I lock it into the sitting position, while it
certainly won't become anything permanent or anything crazy like that, it will
take longer to recover, and I don't want that. But the other reason is, and
this is something that I didn't really think about, but when I talked with
Michelle about this weekend, and I thought about it, she has mentioned that it
will be a lot of Jaq and Jess's friends, and as I said before, I do want to be
able to interact with Parker and Chuck more, as both of them are very outdoorsy
types and I want to get more into the outdoorsy stuff, but when it comes to the
inteactions that are going to be going on at the camp, I will be very out of
place in the sense that it will be a bunch of people that know eachother, and
then me, and while I am sure that I will be able to occupy myself at the camp,
I certainly do not want to go there feel ostracized by these girls and boys.
Indeed, I am in a sort of strange spot where I don't fit in with the kid crew
anymore, but I don't quite fit in with the adults, at least not in the sense
that I think. But all of this is simply me coming up with excuses not to go
now. You see, I was all prepared and ready to leave immediately after work
today, but this popping of my low back (not popping, but rather straining) has
somehow brought into my head all sorts of excuses to change my mind. It's quite
amazing how the brain is able to do that. When I was in physical form to make
the car ride, I was ready to go, but now all I can think of is my back, and how
it feels, and working on mobilizing it and taking care of it. Which is all the
right thing to do. But it's not until that physical manifestation of an
legitimate reason not to go appears that I start to come up with the other
reason why I don't want to go. It's a very interesting phenomenon, and one that
I have not thought about before, and could be a very interesting idea for some
characters to go through. All of this is quite interesting to me.

At this point, I think the best course of action would be this. I should text
Michelle, and let her know my course of action, saying something like how I
thought about coming to the camp this weekend but have passed, but how I would
like to know when people are doing things, and then I could perhaps get from
her hopefully Parker's number, or at the very least some sort of snapchat or
groupme group or something that I could become a part of that I know they use
to communicate when they do things, and then I could become a part of that and
aim to visit Houston more often, or the Ranch which is off of Austin I think,
and in that way I could get more connected with Parker and start to have things
to do with people more. Because stuff like yoga is great, but there is no
"fishing club" that I could become a member of and just start showing up to,
and even if there were, I don't know if I would really want to become a member
of something like that. I mean, I would certainly go for a trial or something,
and from there who knows, but the entire discussion is pointless since there
isn't such a thing.

So I think the course of action is this. I will go to my apartment, eat a bunch
of the beef that I bought yesterday (which I think I have found as the god send
of foods, I bought some marbled steaks for four bucks a pound, which is totally
reasonable, and once I get the art of cooking it down, it will be really good.
I took down two slabs yesterday, which comes out to be about a pound, and I
could have gone for maybe even a little more. On top of that, cooking it was
literally a matter of heating up some oil in a pan and searing it for legit
three minutes, and it had a nice rare center and while it was a touch chewy and
could have been a little more tender, it went down effortlessly) and after or
before or during that, I will spend the rest of the evening mobizing my back
and downing Ibuprofin like it's candy. Then from there, I will read some, or
watch some, or maybe watch some as I mobilize and read some after, go to sleep
in the comfort of my apartment, and decide when I wake up what I want to do. I
know certainly I want to visit my father some time this weekend, especially if
I am to forgoe my trip to Houston, but I don't know when exactly I would intend
to do that.

Something I do want to say, I have neared the end of three and a half straight
weeks of Bikram. I missed a Saturday, and then with the Fourth, I decided to
just cut it there. I will say this. Doing it everyday is a struggle in a few
ways. The first is, you really have to keep on top of the laundry, and the
water intake and all of the management of the schedule required to get to and
from the studio. That shit isn't hard, but it's still a part of the struggle.
That, on top of the fact that sixty minutes is not a short ammount of time, and
when it's all said and done, it eats up a good two hours of the day that could
have been spent cooking, or reading, or any other activity that you could
imagine. Secondly, another difficulty is that none of the days ever become a
good day. Yes, there are certainly days that are better than others, but I
noticed after taking a two day break and coming back to it on a third day after
that (72 hours between sessions) I was much more mentally able to get myself
into the zone, that zone where every posture you hit your edge, and you are
able to feel as though you are gaining something out of it rather than just
doing it because you are obligated to. Doing it every day in a row, I started
to feel that most days became the "okay, I'm here just to do the best that I
can with my body right now" rather than the "wow, I feel good today, and I want
to be here and I am genuinely curious about what I can do today with my body
right now", and there are certainly days where the former will be the case no
matter how you practice (and that's true of anything) but I noticed after only
two days break, I had felt that I hadn't had one of those days in a long time,
and I felt fresh and ready and excited to do the work. Now, you could argue
that I had hit that only because I did have so many maintainence days in a row,
and the special day is a tribute to the high volume work at it's best. In fact,
now that I think on it, that is most definitely what happened. However, there
must certainly be a balance, and more for the first reason I mentioned rather
than the second do I feel that Bikram yoga every day is tough. It's just a lot
of time out of the day, and I have other things that I want to do other than
practice 26 postures sometimes.

The last thing I want to say about Bikram every day is that I feel that
sometimes I just want to flow, and doing Bikram every day leaves no days to
dedicate to just flowing. In fact, now that my low back is in the state it is,
I very much want to have a "just flow" day to work on it, and I am greatly
looking forward to that this evening. The 26 postures, all the same in the same
order with no variation, not even mixing up which side you do first, it get's
wearisome and dull, and while it's good in the sense of being the other extreme
of my criticism of Crossfit, you could argue that Crossfit is good in being the
other extreme of my criticism of Bikram, so there has to be a balance there
that I can strike by not dedicating myself to Bikram and instead treating it as
another tool (which I have been doing, but it's very difficult to see it that
way when you do it every fucking day). Enough on that.


