# 20180801
So last night I did have a dream, but I do not remember very much of exactly
what it was. I will write about what I do remember.

So this dream took place in the dream version of an apartment/RGT gym area. So
I have been in this apartment before, and I have been in this dream version of
RGT, but I have never had them mashed together in a dream like this before. I
know Collin Grayson was a primary player in the dream, as was Troy.
Essentially, I remember the dream was about training BJJ in this gym. And I
honestly don't remember much else about the dream. So that's exciting.

I feel as though I want to do some discovery writing for my story. At the same
time, I am not feeling particularly excited to do that. I am close to finishing
up a case that was returned to me right now, so I sort of want to actually
work, but that will be easy enough to get all squared away when I get to it, so
I'm not concerned about it.

I am also coming along quite nicely on my lit analyzer. I have gotten to the
point where it is sort of coming together like glue, and my rough draft for it
is coming together nicely.

I do want to have a code revision sort of thing going on, like, I definitely
want to reformat and restructure things as makes sense.

A big issue that I am running across is the concept of keeping references
concurrent. So if I add a character to my novel, I want the reference in the
scene to be the same reference in the list of references. That is something
that requires great care, and I feel as though I might not be doing it
correctly. But maybe I am.

I just want to jump into my story.

To whoever may be reading this, I'm sorry, your fate is not pleasant. But if
you are reading this, it means that your friend is dead. For that I am sorry.
However, there are so many more important things than the death of your friend
that I need to tell you. This is of the utmost importance, and I am afraid that
my time is short, so I need to write down everything as I have seen as clearly
as I can so that I can get my message to you. I will attempt to be lucid, but
it will become clear as you read that such a task is near impossible given the
cirucumstances. However, I will try.

I have visited god. And I intentionally use the lowercase so that you are not
confused. This is not the God of myths and legends, not the God of the bible or
the gods of the Greeks. This is the actual god. The one that actually exists.
Let me back up.

As you almost definitely know, I am a hermit. I have been living in this
hermatage for quite a good many years. Since my coming of age I have taken a
vow of hermatiage through the Buddhist monestary. They have set up this
wonderful establishment which I have been blessed enough to call my home for my
life since that day. My days consist of cultivating my garden, and managing my
respectable coop of chicken. Between the vegatables that grow and the eggs that
the chickens produces, I am able to subsist entirely on the food provided to me.
My days are spent mostly in quiet meditation.

But enough about my hermit life, if you want to know more you can inquire with
the monestary. What I need to tell you is something that happened to me,
something that has changed my perception of the world, and everything I believe
in.

Before I talk about my experience, I need to write something down first. I was
told, the people's that will be reading this, you will all four be reading it
over the death of a beloved mutual friend. You might not all know eachother,
but you will all have different backgrounds, and each of you will be equipped
to handle this news in a different way. I was told to tell you, since the
consensus among you, as it should be, will be one on skepticism, to go to a
cave that is seven kilometers through the forest in the south easterly
direction. There is something of a path to this cave, but I have been told that
you must find it on your own, and you must not tell anyone about this cave
before or after the experience you have there. I have ventured into this cave,
and any doubts of my experience were instantly released. I was told not to
describe my experience in the cave, but I have just arrived back from there and
I can do nothing but write everything about what led me to that cave so that
you may see and judge for yourself my story. Again, I must urge you to visit
this cave, exactly in this way. I have been told that it is of vital importance
that you four visit the cave alone. Visit the cave before you judge my story.
After that, it is out of my hands what happens there.

So let me go back a couple of days, and tell you of my experience from the
beginning.

It was becoming winter as it does. The snow was beginning to fall in the
forest, and I was nearing the end of my regular fasting time for this point in
the year. I had harvested my garden and kept a good store of food for the
winter, so I was well equiped to handle this period of weather. I actually
quite like this time, I find I become the most connected with the world and
with myself.

Towards the end of my fast, I was in with my coop of chickens, gathering the
eggs as I always do, and as I was towards the wall I saw slithering between the
crack there a cobra. My back was to the wall, so I did not see it at first,
but I noticed my Hens cawing and flying away from me. I followed the eyes of my
chicken to see what they were looking at, and I immedietly saw the cobra. I
jumped back in alarm, but I knew that this snake had to be taken care of. I had
attended to snakes before, but never one this large or menacing. It slid on
it's belly up to me, and if it were creating a perimeter around the coop, and
my chickens I made sure first of all that they were safe in the corner.

I stood there, between the snake and the chickens, and I knew that I had to
act. Before I could do anything thouht, the snake started to come up onto it's
tail, and make itself tall before me. It's head came up to waist height. I had
not encountered so aggressive a snake before, and I was acting on pure
instinct. It moved around as snakes do, it's head bobbing ever so slightly up
and down, and as I was attempting to discern my course of action, the snake
suddenly pounced to me. It jumped and bit my left forearm. It sunk it's teeth
in, and I could immedieatly feel it's venom come into me. Grabbed it with my
free hand by the head, and I attempted to pull it away from me. It released
it's grip, and I threw it with my free hand against the other side of the coop.
I fell down, and started feeling delerious. The last thing I remember in my
waking moments there, was the snake turning towards me and hissing, almost as
if it were satisfied, before it slithered away back through the crack it came.

As I saw the snake slithering away, I lied there. My vision started to
deteriorate rapidly, and my world began to turn to black right away. My last
thought was "this is the end" and I fell into something akin to the deepest
sleep anyone has ever known.

How long I stayed in this sleep, none can know. I had many fleeting visions,
nightmares, of burning children, and images, faces, that I had never seen
before, of people being tortured, and I was chained, not by any physical
chains, but I was chained by paralysis. I could not move myself at all. In
fact, it was near impossible to say what "myself" was at that point. I did not
even have a body. I just remember there being fleeting images of tortured
souls. These images would not last long, and it seemed as soon as I started to
fixate on any image, it would go away, and be replaced by another one in a
different point.

How long I stayed in this state of delerium I do not know. It felt as if it
were an eternity, but the notion of time was not there. It was like a
nightmare, but unlike any nightmare that I had experienced before. It was like
a dream in that I did not have my full capacity of thought. I did not have my
rationality. I did not understand what was happening, nor did even have the
capacity to know that this were something I did not understand.

After this eternity of images and nightmares, of which I was constanly
attempting in vain to shrink away from, the first thing I remember where I
started to become lucid again was a distant light. It was a light that was like
one of these visions, but like I said, it was distant, but it grew. It came
closer to me and became larger at the same time, until this light began to
overwhelm all of the other visions, and take them away from me. I tried to
focus on the light, but when I focused on it, instead of going away like the
other visions, it grew overwhelming. In fact, quite the opposite happened, the
more I focused on the light, the brighter it became, and the more I tried to
focus away from it, the more it overwhelmed by entire being.

This light became painful. It started to overtake myself, as if it were coming
from my inside and expanding out and bursting out of my body. The pain of it
was unlike anything I have felt in our natural world, and any attempt to
describe it will neccesarily be incomplete.

The light grew more and more, until it began to engulf me. And at that point,
out of the light, I felt something like a hand. It was at this moment that I
gained my lucidity back, and I relalized that I had no body. I could see, and I
could feel, but when I would try and look around, I had no eyes to move, and
when I would try and stretch, or control my limbs, there were no limbs to move.
And the hand that I saw, it stretched out to meet me. I was very scared of this
hand, I wanted to run away from it as much as I could, but I was helpless to
it's doings. The hand reached out, and it grabbed me. I know it makes no sense,
because you have the question of "how can a hand grab something that has no
body." but the best way I can explain it is by saying that the hand reached out
and grabbed my soul. It grabbed my soul, and it pulled me into the light.

The light became my entire being. Everything that I knew was light. Similar to
how one can, in this world, close your eyes and meditate and arrive at a place
of complete darkness and stillness, in this way I was instead taken to a world
where there was complete light. The entire light was my being.

At this point, my sense of sound began to grow as well. I had started to become
accustmoed to the light, and I was beginning to accept it, and right at that
point is when I started to hear a dim ringing. This was a very solid tone of
ringing. It was not high pitched, nor was it low pitched, it felt as though
every frequency was represented in the ringing. It was low at first, and like
the light, it began to grow louder and louder, until it became nearly
unbearable. If I would have had eardrums, I would have been afraid of them
bursting. The overload of the senses became so great, beyond any sensory
experience that exists in this world.

At some point here, this light, and sound, together both, continued to
overwhelm my being, my existance, whatever you may call my state of being
there. My soul did not want any of these things to continue, I wanted it to all
stop, and I was constantly resisting these forces. They caused me great
anguish, the sort of anguish one feels when tied down and forced to watch a
horrific event play out in front of you. I felt helpless to anything, I
resisted, and it felt that the more I resisted, the stronger these sensations
became, and then when I tried to accept, every time I was getting to a point
where I could accept the light and the sound and the feelings of bursting, they
would jump up an order of magnitude, so high that I would instinctually attempt
to resist them again.

My existance went on like this. I would say that it went on for a time, but it
would be more accurate I think to say that it went on for both infinity and an
infinitesimal amount of time, simultaneously. The time of it did not exist, and
instead it was simply the being of it that did.

I think the best way to describe it was, every time the sensation got to the
point where I couldn't take it anymore, it would become another order of
magnitude more intense. And it went on like this for eternity.

The next thing I remember, after that eternity of light and sound, I remember
it all suddenly stopped. It was complete black, and complete silence, and
complete lack of any sensation.

I do not remember anything about this lack of sensation. To me it felt as
though it went by in less than actual moment. It is how when one goes into a
deep sleep, and you wake to discover that your sleep was so deep that it seems
you closed your eyes at sundown and only a minute has passed and it is sunrise.
It was like that experience, where you know that more than a minute has passed,
and you feel that more than a minute has passed, but it felt like only a minute
ago that you were going to sleep. This darkness was like that experience, only
instead of a minute, it was less than the smallest possible unit of time that
it felt, but I knew that I had slept like that not for just one night, but for
an eternity. And when I woke, what a beautiful scene it was that I woke to.
