So I had some dream fragents last night.

The first one, I was outside my parents house, and a cop was there, asking
about BJJ, and if it worked. I told him that it did, and he wanted a
demonstration. We began rolling, and he went in for a guillatine, and I passed
to his other side. He started bragging that BJJ must not work very well if he's
able to get me in a guillatine so easily. After I passed, he tried to tighten
it up, and when he did, I'm not sure why, but I said "Tap tap tap" even though
I wasn't in trouble. I then assured him that what he was doing wasn't right,
because I could choke him from there. He wasn't convinced.

The second part of this fragment, a girl takes me to the side. She had black
hair, and was sorta hot. I'm trying to think of who she reminds me of, but it's
not coming to me. Regardless, she wanted to learn some techniques as well, in
particular, the baseball bat choke that Ross does to me a lot. I had a gi on,
and I told her that it could be done with any piece of material, including my
own gi. I started to feed my lapel behind her neck, I switched the hands, then
I went to grab the lapel with the hand I just switched with, but then I
realized that this wasn't the proper set up for it. I continued to try and
figure it out, but she wasn't interested in that.

That was the end of that first fragment. I had another fragment, where I was in
my parents house, and I was considering masterbating there. It has been a while
irl since I masterbated (like 4 days, nothing crazy, but still) and I remember
thinking about how good it would feel. I looked at the time though, and it was
something like 12:08, and I thought it wouldn't be very wise to try and
masterbate in my parents place when everyone was awake, but I really wanted to.

So what I did was I went to my desk in the school room, I situated myself
seated on the floor between the wall and my chair, and I started browsing
netflix looking for material that was porn like, and as I was searching, Evan
walked in and asked what I was doing. I recoiled, and wasn't sure how to
respond, and I just said that I was browsing netflix. He then asked me why I
was on the ground there, and I said it was because I was organizing the
drawers, and just stayed down there after I was done. I woke up about this
time.
