# 20180728
So yesterday I simply did not have time to give my full attention to the
journal article. Unfortanately, my hour of writing a day failed yesterday, and
I missed out on the opportunity to make up for it. I told myself that I would
make up for it by writing more today, but the thing is, I don't really think it
works like that. If I feel so inspired to write for more than an hour, I do,
but I can't just conjure up that inspiration, at least, it is very painful to
do so, and I don't want that sort of conjuring pain to be associated with this
exericise.

So what I will do is this, I will talk about my day yesterday, and leading up
to today, and it if so happens that I somehow become inspired to write more and
more, and I go past the designated hour today, then so be.

It is not without what I would consider good excuse that I had to cut short my
writing yesterday. So yesterday was actually a reletively productive day for
me. It was great, because I had multiple things I needed to do, and the time
pressure of it forced upon me a sort of efficiency in work that I have been
lacking lately. I think I have begun to discover the balance of doing these
things at work, and balancing the delicate continum of pursuing these sorts of
hobbies in the midst of the work that I have to do.

I think the best mantra I have discovered in working this sort of (questionably
ethical) balance is this. "Just because I am pretending to be inefficient, I am
actually truely efficient." Or more concisely, "Inefficiency is the guise, it
is not true." So the thing about it is, this is what I tell myself when I
actually work. When I go to my other pursuits, I genuinely enjoy what I am
doing, and I don't have to concern myself with "getting work done." That might
be a thing that I start to measure, but I have never been a hyper-organizer,
and hyper-orginazation in that way has never worked for me. I work best when
everything is in a state of organized chaos, is how I like to put it, and for
me it's always the struggle of making sure that the chaos stays organized, but
any time I try and eliminate the chaos, my mind locks down, I get stuck, and I
go into the nihilistic mode that I am so suspect to.

That is an interesting phenomenon to me. Thinking about it, there must be
something deep rooted there. I think for others, especially women, and very
especially type-A women, I think the opposite is true. These women, they're
natural state is "putting order into things" and they work best when everything
is structured, and they have all of the ducks in a row, to use an unfitting
expression, and they have their entire schedule known, and it's all planned
out, and any sort of "organized chaos" is seen as inefficent and lazy and
unneccasary to the way they work.

Not so with me. I absolutely need my "organized chaos" or else I can't work.
It is impossible for me to work in a way where everything has been put into
pre-assigned bundles, and where eveyrthing goes in "it's proper place". I
don't believe things have a proper place.

Actually, that's not true. I don't believe that a proper place can be assigned
to things. That is a better way of phrasing that. I believe that the proper
place of something is a place that is discovered, rather than forced upon it.
It's only by having an organized chaos that you can discover these "proper
places". This is always why I am re-organizing where I keep my things in my
room. Because I come up with a system. My shirts go here, my pants go here, my
BJJ stuff goes here, and etc, but that system doesn't fit everything perfectly.
There are times when I feel like my sweat pants should go in a different spot,
and so I put them there, and when they go there, I start to discover that I
like that spot better. But other times, those same sweat pants, they go in a
different spot, and they work better there for that time. So having a strict
organization is to impose my will on to the natural state of the objects which
I consider "mine".

Of course, the concept of ownership is an abstract one, and it's difficult to
say whether or not someone can ever really own something, but such a
distinction is for philosophical ramblings and not for the pragmatic day to day
neccessity of explaining what is going on in life. When I say "my sweatpants" I
mean the sweat pants that were made in a factory, put into the store, and
picked up by me. A transaction was made through our econimic system, it goest
through the accounting systems of the store that sold them, so in all of those
ways, the society as a whole can come to agree, "Brett has gone through the
necceassry steps to own those sweat pants, and so they are his," and that is a
sort of short hand for, "Those are the sweat pants that society agrees belong
to Brett, and he is the primary and sole wearer of those sweat pants, so they
are his." Such a shorthand, it's interesting.

This is actually something that I was watching Bret Weinstien talk about in one
of his videos. He was talking about the medicinal effects of plants, and why
that could be, and he said the evolutionary reason for it is because the plants
over many generations, they develop poisons, so that animals that eat of them,
when they do, they get sick, so it is a sort of protection mechinism for
plants. They plants that alter their chemistry in such a way to make the
animals sick when they eat them, those plants are the ones that have a greater
chance of surviving. However, there is no way for a young plantling to "know"
what sort of effect the chemicals it creates will poison animals, and so it has
to "experiment" with different chemicals. It is through this evolutionary
experimentation that all sorts of plants create complex relationships with the
animals of its habitat, and it is through this evolution that plants are able
to generate all sorts of variety of substances which alter the biological
facets of the animals that ingest them.

THe interviewer then asked, what Bret meant by experimentation in this context,
because surely the plant does not have the consciousness to be able to
experiment with things in the same way we as humans use that word. And to this,
Bret gave a sort of insightful answer. He said that the interviewer was indeed
very correct, that the plants do not, in the strictest sense of the word,
"experiment" with different poisons. However, Bret argued, what plants do is so
directly anagolous to experimentation, that to say something like "the plant
experiments" is a sort of shorthand for, "the plants develop different chemical
compounds that have different effects on the animals that eat them, and the
plants that create the compounds that have the greatest effect on animals
survive and those plants that do not die out." And when you think about it,
that is the same thing a chemist does in a lab. The chemist will try multiple
different varieties of things, and those things that do not produce the results
he wants, those things die out, and those things that have the greatest result
to what that experimenter is trying to acheive, those pathways persist. It's
such a strong analogy, that to say the plants experiment with different
chemical compounds is merely a matter of semantics at that point.

So this is the same thing with the ownership of the sweat pants. To say I own
them, the extreme buddhist or daoist or eastern thinker (at least, the foolish
Western Eastern thinkers for sure) could say something like, "ownership is a
construct, ownership doesn't actually exist" and to that I say, "Yes, ownership
is a construct, and it's a construct that I am using to describe the
realtionship between me and these sweatpants".

That's actually a really cool idea, and one that I haven't thought about using
to make my points. People say the same thing about gender. In fact, as I woke
up today, I started watching a video with Rogan, and someone with the prefix of
Dr te their name, and this doctor was a doctor of "sex psychology" as they
talked about it. And I only watched a little bit of it, because Rogan was very
much intruding on the words of the guest, and I hate it when interviewers do
that, and I wasn't sure if it would continue like that or if it would all be
issufferable. The podcast is two hours long, so at some point I might finish
through it, but it mostly seemed like they were talking about all the gender
issues which have been beat to death by this point.

I suppose, though, people will say things as silly as "gender is just a
construct, gender doesn't actually exist." Using this analogy, I could say
somethnig like, "Ownership is also a construct, do you agree? To say 'I own
these pants' is technically an inncorrect statement, as that's not what is
really going on" and then I would go on to continue the ownership thing, and
then "Gender is the same way, gender is a construct that we use to describe the
world, and it's just a matter of how you want to construct it."

That's an interesting notion though, because then the feminist theory would
rear in their head, and say something like, "Yeah, and we've constructed gender
to be a patriarchy, and that's not okay," or something like that, and at that
point we get into a lot more intelligent discussion. At that point, you can
begin to ask questions like, "Well, was gender constructed as a patriarchy with
the intent of creating an imbalance, or was gender constructed by the doings of
the world, and the doings of the world revealed itself as a partriachy, and we
merely constructed gender to attempt to explain what was happening in the
world?" Of course, I would lean more towards the latter, but the former, it
definitely has it's merits. But I think it has it's merits in the sort of way
that such a construction neccesarily creates a snowball effect. Like, the
latter is why is the gender is constructed in the way it is, and because we
constructed it in that way, it became misunderstood, and we started letting the
construction dictate our lives, rather then the state before where we were just
living our lives.

This is why I want to study history so much, and mythology. There is so much
truth in all of it, and for me it is just a matter of becoming well read in it
all.

To diverge a bit (and I'm wholly done talking about this gender thing, like I
said, it's beat to death, and I only want to take this as far as it goes
without beating the dead horse), I have finished reading Asimov's guide to
Corilianeous, and I must say that I am having this inkling that I really love
Shakespeare's roman history plays.

Something that struck me, reading over Asimov's guide to it (I have not read
the play itself yet, but I will certainly get to it), was the fact that there
was a lot of historical innacuracy in it. Even Plutarch, who is considered the
source of these things, Plutarch admits himself that he romanticised the
tellings of these peoples, and that he was more concerned with the sociological
outcomes of the doings of the men then he was with the actual facts of what
these men did. And it seems, at least from Asimov's opinion, that the roman
histories were based on Plutarch, almost as a retelling of Pultarchs stories in
the modern environment.

What I find most interesting about this, is that people often criticize modern
film for being "not at all historically accurate", and they deem them
"incorrect" in their retellings. But having begun to explore shakespeares
histories, it seems to me that this is not at all a now phenomenon. Hell, even
Pultarch was doing it in the second century when he wrote his work. He was
"retelling" the lives of men of history in his time, and he was not concerned
with being historically accurate, but he was more concerned with the dramatic
aspect of it then he was on the accurate side.

Of course, there are plenty on the other side of the coin, who find it their
duty to stick to the actual facts of the matter.

Something I just thought, something I want to do. I would love to mythologize
our American heros. That is not something that has been done yet. Oh my, what I
great undertaking that would be. Similar to how Virgil mythologized Aenies and
his taking of Rome, in the same way I could mythologize the founders of our
country. That requires so much knowledge though. So much knowledge. And I don't
have that knowledge. I need to read Gibbon, because I feel that a knowledge of
that is the prerequisite for this sort of undertaking. Which means I need to
get to finishing my lit analyzer. Or at least get to the point where it is
usable, and my notes can take a life of their own.

Indeed, that WIP is coming along, but that is another thing I feel bad about.

I still haven't talked about yesterday.

Yesterday I met Liel, and we had our first language exchange meeting. I was a
little nervous going in, and I felt very ill prepared. I spent most of the time
that I would have spent writing in this journal creating flashcards, and
writing out a short little story that was wholly juvenile, but gave us
something to go on.

Well, it turned out that we spent about a good three hours exchanging language
there. She helped me with Russian, and she was very enthusiastic with helping.
I felt very nervous at first, and she wanted to start with Russian, so I rose
up to my nervousness there. That was the very proper way to start it as well,
looking back. She is much better at English than I am at Russian, obviously, so
English was the default mode of our speech, and she helped me with some things
that sounded strange to her, and with also things that I was very clearly
missing.

It was a very good experience, and "making material" to bring to her will help
me a lot. If nothing else, it keeps me accountable on the whole thing.

She had written for her blog a journal article that she wanted me to look over.
There were many things that she had written which were clearly phrased a little
strange, and I think that reading these things is a lot more jarring than
listening to her speak. A lot of the issues of her writing were the use of the
words "in" and "on" and prepositions such as that, she would say something
like, "We went in Houston Downtown" which you know what that means, it means
clearly "we went to downtown Houston", and so with those sorts of things it's
easy to correct, "this word should be that word, and the word order here is
wrong" but there were other things that were much harder for me to correct.

The best example of this was a sentence she had about the homelessness
situation there. She was talking about how she doesn't usually like downtown
areas (and that was somtehnig we had to work out the proper way to say as well)
but that the Houston downtown was nice. Then she had a sentence that was
somethingh like "In the downtown there were homeless people because downtowns
have homeless people but in Houston was not scary to walk around at all". This
sentence was very, well, it was really difficult for me to navigate why it was
that it was phrased incorrectly. I knew it was because the term "homeless" was
used, and she wasn't talking about homelessness at all in her trip, her trip
was certainly not about homelessness but about her trip to Houston, so I knew
that that term had to be replaced with "shady areas" or something like that.
But then when I mentioned that, she asked me, "What do you mean by 'shady'" and
I then had to explain that term.

I only mention these things to talk about the difficulty when it comes to
explaining why a certain sentence sounds strange to my ear. That was the best
example that I remember of a sentence I had to completly rework. We ended up
landing on something like, "Downtown Houston has it's shady areas like
every downtown does, but it was not scary at all to walk around and explore
downtown". She then had a sentence about the construction there.

I could go on like this, talking about the entire thing, but I think the point
is made. What I want to get at is, I want to be sure that when I make these
sorts of edits, especially the sorts of edits that require the reworking of the
entire sentence, that I am making them with the interest of keeping her voice
in through the entire thing. I am very afraind of injecting my writing into her
works, and I want to try and avoid that as much as possible.

As we were leaving, and we were standing outside the shop, I mentioned that it
would help me a lot if, next time, before we meet, if she could share what she
had written so that I could go over it, because I felt like I spent a lot of
time actually going through the edits, and I told her I would rather talk about
why I would change things like I do, instead of spending time going through the
actual process. She agreed.

At this point, I had felt this moment since we walked out and were standing
outside the door, I had the inclination that a hug would be appropiate. As we
stood there, and we were wrapping up, I asked, "would a hug be appropiate here"
and she said "of course" and opened her arms out, and we had a brief hug,
before we finished by concluding that we wanted to do this every week, and that
evenings for her might work differently depending on her husbands schedule with
the baby and everything, and I said that's great, and that as long as I know
which evening, I can make time in my schedule for it.

I'm not sure why I feel the inclination to say that. It is not true that I am
free every evening, because even though I have not as late done anything in the
evenings (I have been eating a pound and a half of beef or fish after work, and
god knows I don't want to do anything after that), I certainly at some point
will want to go back to doing things. Or maybe not, I honestly don't know.

Yesteday evening I was considering going back to Bikram again, since I haven't
been there in probably a couple weeks now, but this took precedence.

But yeah, I was pleasently surprised with how well that went. It is certainly
the start of something really cool, and while it was a little strange, and we
both didn't know how to get the most out of it, I am certainly a lot more
equipped to prepare myself with exactly what sorts of things I should come to
her with.

What I have decided, at least for the next visit, is to create to things, one
story, and another a dialogue. The dialogue I want to practice out loud, and I
want to begin to memorize a sort of framework of dialog. When I think about it,
english small talk is always sort of the same, and I think that Russian small
talk is probably similar in a lot of ways. So I could create a dialog of
something like "Hi, my name is Brett," and then the other would have a reply,
and if I noticed a Russian accent, I would say, "If you don't mind me asking,
where is your accent from" and if they mention Russian, then I could go into
"Ах! Ты говоришь по-Русски?" and they would say да and I would say "I speak
russian too" but in Russian, and then I could start to practice certain phrases
and things, and just get the basics down of small talk. How long have you been
in the states, What brings you here, things like that, and I could pratice in a
way to always "mix up" exactly how I say things. I could come up with the "most
strict and mundane" version of the small talk, and once I am confident with
thta, I could start to venture out from things like, "How long have you lived
here" to things like, "When did you move here?" and etc. mixing up the answers
with things like, six years, I've been here six years, I moved here six years
ago, but in their russian counterparts. That will be my exercise for
conversation, and that I want to practice out loud.

I also then want to practice writing. That will be the sort of dual of these
things. The saying and the conversational skills, combined with the writing.
The writing is a much more intellectual pursuit, where as the conversational
skills is much more right brained, and comibining those two things together I
think will work out the best for me.

I like it, we are on the right path to getting this thing done.

Now I just need to get my lit analyzer organized in my head, so that I can feel
comfortable reading and making notes on Gibbon and Mommson, and that coupled
with readings of Plutarch, and Shakespeare, and Homer, and Eusophocles, and all
the others, will really put all of these things together.

Life is an exciting thing, and I always feel like there is not enough time in
the day.

That is another interesting thing, not only is there not enough time in the
day, but the time for things other than these pursuits is important as well.
The time for "un-productive time" is something that I need to become better at
mastering. I have done a lot better about only watching Firebat at the end of
the day, rather then watching a bunch of random youtube videos. I still have
the habit of falling asleep to hearthstone tournaments, and if reading fails me
in that time, hearthstone will put me to sleep.

When I get to a certain point, I want Russian Children's stories to put me to
sleep. That's actually a really good idea now that I think about it. I should
get the Russian stories onto my tablet, and just pretend like I'm reading them
as I go to sleep. Of course, I can read english stories as well, but I should
start throwing in the Russian ones as well, because, well my late night before
bed reading is always really scattered and unstructured anyway, so maybe I read
some shakespeare, and if that isn't doing it for me, I'll switch over to some
Russian, and then if that's not doing it for me, then I can go to something
like Clancy or Sanderson if I feel, and then if even that is not doing it then
I could concede to HS. I like that. I should do that.

Anyway, I have written for about an hour and a half now, so I think I have
sufficiently "made up" for what I missed yesterday. I had no dreams last night,
but if I did that would have taken up another hour of the time, so we'll see
where the rest of the day takes me.

I am considering going to see Bill Burr, because to be quite honest I am not
sure if this Dateswitch thing is happenenig or not. I was an asshole and didn't
reply to the original email message, but then I got no reminders or anything
like "we are still awaiting your reply, so I don't have a fucking clue. To be
totally honest, I'm not feeling it right now, and would much rather go to see
Bill Burr, so that is probably what I will do. I am wrestling with, like, how
much of an asshole about this dateswitch thing do I want to be, and the answer
is not much of one, but still, I got no additional reminders, and I don't want
to go, and I am content with saying that 35 bucks or whatever is just gone now.
I want to see a comedian live, and Bill Burr is one of them.

In fact, I think I am decided, I am watching Burr tonight. That is the plan,
and you can't stop me. It's just a matter of visiting my father in the rehab
today or tomorrow, and I think today would make the most sense of it. I'll
figure out what I want to do in the mean time.

My brain is about all spent of writing right now, I don't have much more that I
want to write about, os I think I will stop writing for now. I could talk about
the state of my dad, but I will do that after visiting him and sleeping on it.
That is the topic for tomorrow.

So I literally just got back from Bill Burr, and I want to talk a littel bit
about it.

I found the whole experience interesting. I literally just bought the tickets
something like four hours before the thing even started, so I had tickets in
the back row. I arrived an hour early, and I saw that very few of the seats
were taken and people were generally just sort of milling about. After about
thrity mintutes of walking around and exploration of the theater (I wanted to
evaluate seats for perhaps future events), I sat in my seat and began the Wim
Hof breathing. I did taht pretty much right up to the opener.

The opener was all right. I found it interesting, his bits were, how do you put
it, they felt like he had them lined up. In fact, Bill was like this as well,
although you could tell Bill was way more comfortable on stage. This guy got on
and started with the usual, "What's up Dallas" and everything, and immedietly
people wooed and cheered, which I have never understood, and never will.

In fact, that was teh most interesting thing about the whole experience. I told
myself going in taht I would not laugh, and that instead I would observe the
laughter and the reactions of all the people around me, and that is what I did.

There were certainly bits that I thought were funny, some that I had heard
before, and others that I had not. What I thought was interesting is the level
of crowd work that he did. Firstly, there was a camera man there, and he
started mocking him a bit, just because he was there and, well, I think that
part was all planned. The accustics in the room, he mocked that a little bit,
he let out a "FUCK" and he mentioned it was like an echo chamber in here. Stuff
like that. It felt like it was his first time actually doing a sound check. It
was interesitng.

I guess, what I found interesting about it is, I know that, if this were a
special, all of that kind of shit would be cut, and I know that shit is cut for
specials, and edited, and taped together, and everything else, but I had never
been to a live performance, so I didn't know what sorts of things were the
things that got cut. And the things that got cut were the things that made it
seem as though, "okay, I'm testing out the stage, and etc etc." 

One of the things that struck me was, there was so much walking around the
whole time. Like, before I sat down, I drank some water, went to the restroom,
and settled in for what I knew would be about an hour to hour and a half show.
I guess others don't have the power or the forethought or the knowledge to do
that. I think others just, well, I don't know why they got up. Maybe it was the
restroom, maybe they were getting more drinks, I don't know. I sincerely don't
know. Bill even inturrupted some of his bits to comment on this, especially
people in the front row that would do that.

There were also hecklers. People would yell out things. One person yelled out
about his shoes, and the camera man did a close up of Bill's shoes, and that
was a sort of bit. I sort of wanted to watch the 10 oclock show as well,
because, well, I wanted to see how much of these "candid feeling" moments were
really candid. It's hard to say.

Something also I want to say about the show, I did not realize how much he
would play to his specific crowd. He did a lot of Texas accent type jokes,
mocking gun control and things like that, and that sort of stuff you don't see
on the special either. Usually on the special you only see the jokes that apply
to everyone, they cut the shit that's specific. It's interesting, but it
detracted for me.

The first big laugh he got, and I think probably the biggest laugh of the
night, was when he talked about how Texans, he said, "I know you're not cattle
ranchers, you just have pickup trucks to pay homage to your cattle ranching
background." He talked about shiny trucks, with saddles in the back that
haven't ever been used, and shit like that, and that seriously made people
laugh. It caught me a little off gaurd as well, although I was certainly not
effected by the laughter.

But all of that aside, the rest of his show was good. As in, it was classic
Bill Burr, and it's what you would expect. Other people were certainly getting
into the flow of the timing of his bits. His timing was really spot on, and I
think that's why he is so great.

Something I noticed, is taht he would lean into a polically incorrect topic,
but he would always just dip his feet in. He always did so unapolagetically,
but he would never wade in the same politically incorrect pool for very long.
It was like he could feel that the crowd wasn't ready for the full version of
his thoughts, so he would back off a bit. Again, I don't know how much of that
is him playing the crowd, and how much of that is built into his script.

The thing that struck me the most, was a bit. He did a bit about #MeToo, which
is all the rave now of course, the me too movement, and the bit was actually
really good. I liked it a lot. He talked about how this women, he walked by
him, before he was about to do a private show, and she flicked him right on the
tip of the dick. It was a good bit, and he encapsulated very well the feelings
and emotions that a man goes through ( and I know I would certainly go through)
if something like that happened to me.

What happened at the punch line of his bit astounded me though. He talked about
how he finish his show, went back, and was still just angry that this women had
flicked, but not at that, but at the fact that he could do nothing to
retaliate. And then he said, "And eventually, I meditated, and you know what, I
came to forgive her" and at this, he got the only boo of the night. People
actually booed him for that. It was astounding to me. To me, it was the most
profound, well thought out, well articulated bit, and people booed him for the
ending of it.

Now, I'm not saying there should have been applause, that would be just as
weird, if not even more strange. In fact, I think the boo fits, but not for the
reasons I think it does. He recovered of course, and I am quite certain he has
done that bit before, and I am quite certain that he probably gets booed every
time. He recovered by saying how he imagined how her childhood was probably
shit, and his meditation gave him comfort because he saw visions of her life
spiraling out of control, or something like that, I honestly don't remember the
recovery which got the laugh, but it was something like, he got back at her by
imagining her life taking a downward spiral from her childhood, something like
that, and that got some "recovery laughs".

I knew exactly when he was going to end to, he ended with what I know is his
best bit, a bit that I have seen on youtube in so many different sources, the
bit about how he met his child and he felt nothing. It's a good bit, I like it,
but I've heard it from him more times than I can count, so yeah.

After he finished, he walked off the stage, and I stayed and watched for a bit.
He high fived some of the people in the front row seats, and walked off, and
then people started working their way out. They lined up, and walked out, and I
watched them, and as they walked out I saw a whole team of ushers, all in red
shirts, picking up the trash that was left behind. That scene probably had more
of a profound effect on me than anything else in the show. I've watch a lot of
Bill Burr, and seeing him life was certainly a different experince, I got to
glimpse these interesting moments, to see a man who is so good at what he does
get on stage and do it, that's something, and the notion of him doing this as
his job, this is what he does every day, this is what he works for, I could
never do it, not through lack of ability, but I feel I am called for something
else, and getting up and making a crowd laugh, that is not it. WHat I want to
say, a crowd would not want to hear. Every individual in the crowd might want
what I want to say, but not the crowd. Crowd mentality is a strange thing, and
to see it in action, well, I've never really seen it before, and it was quite
like what I expected, but it still very much perplexes me. It perplexes me very
much.

But yeah, the ushers picking up all the trash, I don't understand. People just
leave all of the cans and bottles and things on the ground and in the cup
holders. It's disgusting, and so many people did it. I did not realize that was
a thing.

So yeah, I let the crowd beat me out. I went to the top floor of teh parking
garage, and tried to sit up on top of it like I do at the garage at work, but
this one, I couldn't, because there was no railing, and I got terrible vertigo.
I felt like I was going to fall at the slightest fart in the wind. So I watched
from the side, I watched the cars go out, I watched the people walk around, I
watched all of it, like I do.

Something I thought, I would probably be considered a "suspicious target". I
suspect that, if this were a sensitive event, I would have raised some red
flags. Of course, I'm not so arrogent to think that people are paying attention
to the exact moter patterns of the way I walk. Maybe that would be more
paranoia. Whatever it is, I don't I actually raised any flags, I was probably
just another guy, walking around, and the most I probably did was make some
ushers feel uncomfortable as I avoided eye contact. I hate the interaction of
"Can I help you" "No" "Okay, enjoy the show". It's their eight words, eight
words that acheieved nothing, and the answer is always going to be no, so there
is no point in me to engage in thta conversation, but ushers, they are trained
to do that, and so it probably weirds them out when I am a guy that walks with
his eyse forward, and distinctly avoids shifting them to make sure I avoid eye
contact with the usher. It's porbably seen as anti social and weird, where as I
see it as "avoiding the unneccesary out of my life" which maybe is antisocial
and weird, but that's who I am and how I choose to live my life. I'm not saying
a I have a right to live in that way, or that I'm entitiled to it, it's just
that is how I choose to live it. Is it right, is it wrong, I don't care either
way.

So yeah, all in all an interesting experince. I want to see CK for sure at some
point, and I want to see him in a city other then Dallas. CK will be back, and
I want to be there for his return to comedy.
