# 20180731
So this entry I actually don't have much to talk about. I did not have any
dreams last night, at least not that I remember, and I also did not anything
much eventful happen to me to talk about, so this will be one of those rambly
entries where I talk for an hour about random things here and there and
hopefully come upon something that is worth reading back later and going "I am
glad I wrote that." although most likely will come back as "well, I wrote that
I guess.

Something I want to look into for vim is a way to fold away the links I make. I
envision that there will be a lot of them by the time I'm done with my lit
analyzer, and to not be able to see them and to continue to be able to read
would be nice. I'm am concerned for the ammount of clutter that it will bring
into the whole thing. I think it will not work like I want, and that I
shouldn't concern myself with that feature too much for right now and instead
continue to focus on the actual tagging tool itself.

I'm not sure what I want to talk about.

I could talk about my story. The dragon and the king has come to a bit of a
half. I might come to it this weekend now that I think about it. The weekend
before last I got stuck because I forgot to commit my work from my work
machine, and then this weekend I just didn't do it. I watched Bill Burr and
worked on my analyzer instead. So I might come to work on that.

I really don't have much to talk about. That's amazing. I don't think this is
writters block, this is just, it's something else, it's a lack of things to
talk about. I should make tea. Okay, brb making tea.

Okay, I have tea now, but it is too hot to drink, so it will be a bit before I
can start sipping on it. I know the reader has zero care about my tea right
now, but that is the state of things. I am merely trying to continue to write
in order to get words on a page.

That is something that I have found interesting about my writing habits. I tend
to write in a stream of consciousness form, but that sort of form is incorrect
for any respectable work in my opinion. I have not read Ulysses, so until I do
I will withhold my statements, but I feel as though stream of consciousness
will always inject the authors consciousness into the characters, when that
should not be the case. The characters should be a reflection of the author,
not a representation of him.

So I do want to talk about my story for a bit. I actually had an idea a couple
days ago about a story, but I forget what the story was. It had something to do
with two people, and it was related to something I was reading. It was directly
inspired by something I was reading. It was definitely Oedipus, now that I
think about it. It was the second scene in Oedipus. Let me see if I can recall
what was happeneing. So the first scene, Oedipus hears that the cause of their
woes is that the murderur of the late king, Oedipus's father (though he does
not know that) is still out and about. Of course, we know that Oedipus is the
murderer, but he does not. So in the second scene he calls upon a wise man to
tell him who the murderer is.

Oh, okay, this is the idea. I have a much more tyrantical version of Oedipus.
This could be an excerpt on Trump, actually, now that I think about it. This is
so much similar to Oedipus story that it would be plagerism to take it. But in
the same way, there would be a plague or whatever, and a wise man says from the
gods that the gods will be appeased when the man who murdered someone is dead.
And so the king, he hurries along the will of the gods, and everyone who is
suspect by the god, he has them killed immediately, and if the plague is not
cured, then he knows that that wasn't the person.

There could be dialog from his right hand man, like, "sir, surely the death of
potentially innocent lives should be taken into consideration" and the king
would say, "in war, there will be casualties, and sacrifices must be made." He
could even justify his very arbitrary slayings of this time by saying something
like, "If we allow this plague to persist, then surely more innocent people
will die from disease then those that die from my hand, so let us take every
possible measure to speed along this treatment of the plauge." The story would
go on. Two innocent men would die, and all the time the king is content, but
then the third name comes along, and it is that of the king.

At this, of course, the king is outraged, and he refuses to enact the same
treatment that his people have. I don't know where the story goes from there.
Like I said, this story is not one that I have discovered on my own, it is very
inspired by Oedipus. I should probably just finish reading Oedipus. It was just
a cool little idea I had for a story.

I think the story is dated though, is the thing. Such an oracle does not exist
anymore, and we don't claim that they do. In order for this to be a story that
would be an effective commentary, I would have to link it to Christianity or
Islam or another such religion, and try and reveal the absurdities in it, but
such a coarse treatment of the religion would be incorrect, I think. We need
more subtle parody, not "A blabbering king makes stupid decisions in the name
of god" Perhaps it could be a part of a sort of trilogy, or something, but then
I would have to come up with the rest of the trilogy.

So at this point, I want to go back to discovering the tale of the hermit. I
think discovering other stories is interesting, but I have quite discovered
this tale, and I want to get to the point where I have written words for it.

Let's start with what I have in my head as an outline. I don't remember what I
wrote for an outline for it a few articles ago, but I certainly have an outline
in my head now for this story, so I will write out the outline in my head
rather then try and reference the outline that I wrote for this before.

The key thing is that everyone dies. This story is certainly a tragedy.
However, I want the tale of the hermit to live on in a time capsule. I also
want my most enlightened character to actually have a dream that is like the
hermit's dream. That is actually a really cool idea.

I also want to link it to flat earth.

So, let's start at the top.

Brett is a guy who is a flat earth fanatic. He's all gung-ho about flat earth
theory and all of that. He is also a very quirky fellow. He is a yoga
instructor, but a rather creepy one, he says all of the bullshit yoga things
about linking to your chakras and finding you inner pranayama's and he gets
really into it. He's what you would call "western eastern".

So Brett goes out on a trip, to this secluded house. It's a hermitage, and he
decides to live for a while up there, maybe a couple weeks, maybe a month, I'm
not sure on the details there yet. What's important is, when he is there, he
finds a document, the document of the hermit. This document will be difficult
for me to discover. However, in the document, the hermit will describe his
visit to the other world. The hermit will describe in great detail the nature
of the world that he visits, and he will describe the god of the universe. This
god will explain to him about the flat earth design of the world. This god, he
made the world, but he has lost control of it. He wants people to know about
him and about the nature of the world, but he can't reach us, and the hermit's
experience, he says that the reason the hermit is able to find him and see him
is because his experience is so pure and untainted by the reality that he is
able to trancend it and see what is real. So the hermit describes all of this,
and he says that his instructions by this god were to take a piece of paper
with a symbol on it, and put it away in a box, and hide the box in his
hermitage.

It is Brett who finds the box. In the box, the symbol he immediately recognizes
as the flat earth symbol.

I also need there to be more proof than that. So I will also say that this god,
this god gives the hermit a story that predicts the future. I want it to be
vague though, but at the same time still very uncanny. I don't want any proper
names, but I definitely want something alluding to events that happen. Specific
events. Something like, "the one who finds this, he will have a friend, and
this friend will be able to confirm what I say." This friend will be Damien.
But I don't want Damien's name to be mentioned. I only want to mention that
this friend is a professor of whatever Damien is a professor of, Physics, at
wherever Damien is a professor, at MIT, or another prestigous school (I don't
want MIT, I would rather like to come up with an unreal university, that is,
unreal IRL but real in the story). I want there to be undeniable evidence as
well. I like the idea of a cave that "when four venture into this cave," (and
the location will be described in the writings) "I will cause the supernatural
to occur.

I like that. That gives the proof of this story. I still haven't decided what
"the supernatural" is. I like the idea of a rock floating on a pedastal. I also
like the image a lot of perhaps around the area, a lot of sticks and stones and
things form together to form the image of a person. All of the loose tree roots
and things in that area, they form together to form the image of a person. I
have the picture of it in my head so vividly. The small vines make up what
would be the veins, and the bigger branches make up the bones, and the leaves
go over his face to create the image of a face. There are some dead rats, and
some of their body parts get pulled together to make other more intricate
features like the heart, and lungs, and organs. And it all goes together. It
might even begin to speak. It might say something like, "Spread the word of
what you have seen here" or something like that, which would be entirely
consistent with the hermit's story. But then, when one of the people touches
it, it collapses, into a pile of branches and vines and dead animal organs.

I like that as the supernatural event that happens. Damien will insist that it
is trickery, that it's an elaborate prank. There will be a lot of dialog
between Kimberly and Damien about the foreseeable doubt.

The other two, Lyse, (whose name I am not entirely satisfied with) will have
the most insightful things to say. And Susan, Susan will be the voice that
says, this can't be true, that it's sorcery and demons. Lot's of absurd things
like that. She will do her best to make it fit into whatever world view she
wants it to.

Yes, that is coming together.

So let's begin.

The preface, or prologue, will be the story of the hermit. It will be what
Brett finds in the thing. However, I won't mention Brett. Basically, the story
will be everything Brett finds.

The opening scene then, after the prologue, would be Damien getting a note from
Brett. I'm not sure the exact nature of how that part goes yet, but Damien will
get the note, along with the news that Brett had died. From this we learn a
little bit about Brett. After reading the note, which will be a brief note,
urging Damien to come down there right away, Damien and Kimberly will head down
together. In the note as well, he will mention that he found a document that
proves "I'm not crazy".

I'm still sketchy about this whole thing. Susan and Lyse meet Damien and
Kimberly there, at the scene. Brett is definitely killed pretty soon after he
wrote the note. Someone has to be the landlord of the house. Indeed, the
landlord of the house has to be a character, and I have not discovered him yet.

It could be through this character that Damien and Kimberly meet Lyse and
Susan. I like that. I also like the idea that the house is an established
sacred ground, or something, and that it is reserved for these hermitage
expeditions.

I think Damien gets specific instructions about where exactly to look for the
document. I want Damien to find the document, almost by chance though. I want
Damien and Brett to be good friends, and I want Damien to know about Brett's
quirks. And one of Brett's quirks was, he would always keep things in weird
locations.

I have just realized that I am missing a character that blindly accepts this
all as fact. This character has to be a woman, and I think this character is
strongly associated with Brett. I need Susan, I need Damien, and I need
Kimberly. So that leaves Lyse. Indeed, it makes sense that I haven't discoverd
a good name for Lyse, because he is my weakest character. I need Susan, and I
need Damien, and I like Kimberly. I acutally haven't discovered Lyse yet
though. I will discover him.

Anyway, so after they the four of them meet, and Damien finds the document,
they have the funeral for Brett, and some time later, I think they decide to go
to this cave described in the document. That's where they see the thing.

From there, there will be a lot of dialogue. The dialogue from there, it will
happen when I get to that point. The dialogue will come to me, I know it will,
and the dialogue will be what I find.

Well, later, after this event, I want Damien to be thinking about the whole
thing, and he will go and find another document. I have this notion that there
should be two documents. I don't know how I like this. I want this second
document to describe what will happen if it's not followed directly. It will
foreshadow the death of Susan. I like Susan dying first. I still haven't
discovered how these characters die.

I know Damien dies after he discovers the flat earth. He is able to make it to
the end of the earth, and he is killed by "the man" there. That scene will be
difficult to write, but it's the only one where I know. And Kimberly, she will
be the last one alive, and she will die in a car accident after she places the
documents into a time capsule.

Susan, I am not sure what the appropiate death for Susan is. Her death I want
to be the one "prophesised" by the second document. That death also has to be
the product of her delerium. Susan very much goes delierous after this whole
thing. Lyse is abusive to her about it as well. Their conversations will be
that of an abusive husband to her wife. "Woman! You think you know the truth,
but the truth happened right before your eyes and you deny it!" I like that
line.

She dies of a seizure. I need to research a bit about seizures, but she has a
seizure and dies. This seizure is foretold by the second document. The second
document, it gives insturctions about how to spread the word.

This death is what causes Damien to seek out flat earth. He makes arrangements
to visit, and gives Kimberly instructions on what to do if he doesn't return.

I want Damien to find the "outer rim".

I guess, at this juncture, I am a little conflicted about something in
particular. I want all of this to be true. I want to underscore the absurdity
of having answers for this whole thing.

I just had an idea that, instead of killing Damien, the organization exposes
him to intense psychotherapy, and they effectively fry his brains. I don't like
that though. His death should be covered up. There needs to be a natural
explanation of his death.

Also, I like the idea of Lyse being led to suicide after Susan dies.

I have the stereotypical scene of "no, don't jump" as he is trying to explain
to everyone that his death is the only way to find Susan and save her soul. I
like that a lot, actually. I want the idea of, "This is the way it works" to be
woven throughout.

I want Kimberly to have her dream the same night that Damien is killed. In her
dream, she gets a vision from Brett, and Brett tells her that this was not the
plan, and Brett gives her new instructions from the god, to leave the documents
and a new symbol in "some place that won't be discovered for 25 years" and I
want Brett to emphasize "25 years exactly" and Kimberly says that she can think
of how to hide these things, but that she can't control when somebody finds
them. But Brett says, "You will find a way, just believe." So when Kimberly
wakes up, she draws the symbol, not knowing what it means, and then she gets a
call from her neice, and her neice is so excited about a school project they
are doing, "they are making a time capsule" and she is so excited, and this has
a profound effect on Kim, and she knows right away that she must hide it in the
time capsule.

The last scene, I think I want to be her death in a random car accident. As she
merges on to the highway, she looks out to the open field beside her, and as
she is looking she does not realize that she is merging on top of someone. That
someone was doing her makeup on the highway, and when she hears the honk, she
swerves out of the way, but she was already going fast enough that she
completely lost control of the vehicle, and ran straight into a barrier that
sent her flipping. She was prononced dead at the scene. Something like that.

I want the last scene to be one of the investigators finding the rough draft of
the symbol, and sending it in for evidence. Something like that.

So from the top.

Hermit story.

Damien and Kimberly hear about Brett's death.

Damien and Kimberly meet Lyse and Susan at the Landlords.

Damien discovers the document.

Discussion.

The four go to the cave and witness the supernatural event.

More discussion

Damien, troubled, thinks about everything that has happened.

Damien discovers the second document

Susan dies of a seizure. Her last words to Lyse are, "Call Damien"

Damien reads and willfully disobeys the insturction in the second document.

Damien learns about Susan's death from a distraught Lyse.

Lyse kills himself.

Damien tells Kimberly about his conviction to see the edge of the world for
himself.

Kimberly has a dream about Brett, she makes a rough draft of the symbol.

Damien's trip to south Africa, his expedition to the edge of the world, and his
death by the "organization".

Kimberly buries the thing in the time capsule.

Kimberly dies in a car accident, and the symbol is found by the investigator
and put into evidence.

This is coming together nicely, very nicely. I like what I have so far. I am
very comfortable with this outline, and I might take it upon myself to spend
time writing the different sections here. It's coming to life, I love it.
