# 20180707 Recap of the day - Codemnation of PBJ - Discovery of the hermit
Okay, so today has been a weird day for me so far. I can honestly say that I
haven't done much of anything since the day started, but I feel as though I
somehow have done a lot of things. To recap what I have done today.

During the night, I know I had a dream. I know this dream was interesting,
because I remember waking up to a half awake half asleep state, and thinking
about how I was a little excited because I had a good dream, and that I knew it
still wasn't time to wake up yet, but that I should remember the dream when I
do and promptly go to write it down. Well, many hours later after sleeping some
more, I didn't dream any more and I entirely forgot what the dream was. So that
was that.

The second thing I remember is coming to the realization that my low back was
not feeling any better than it was the day before, and in fact was about the
same level of shitiness. As I started to move around, and get up, I quickly
determined that it was indeed no better, and I got up and paced for a bit
resenting this fact. I popped some more ibuprofin (which I will do again after
I finish writing here) and continued to walk around a bit, thinking about how
much I wanted to smoke some weed, thinking about how much more aware and how
much more able I would be to treat it if I could only smoke some marijuana.
Fuck me there too man.

Thirdly, I spent some time edging myself to pictures of women on reddit. It was
nothing too extreme, but I definitely did some legitmate masterbating. In fact,
even just talking about it right now is making me uneasy, and I am finding
myself wanting to return and do it again. But we are not doing that, we are
writing instead.

Fourthly, I constructed an even warlock deck in Hearthstone and played a bit of
that. I am currently at rank shit tier this season (rank 23 and up) and have
had 100 % success with this deck so far. Of course, when I actually start
playing against not rank shittier, I do not know how it will go, but that is
taht.

Lastly, and in my time leading up to this journal article, I screwed around on
D3 with Evan a bit, since I saw he and Kyle were playing it, and I decided to
get on just for the shits and giggles. It was interesting enough, but it was
mostly just running around asking about the new game mechanics and things like
that.

So all of that to say, I don't know what to make of myself this morning and
day. I think I have decided to give up PBJ all-together, especially in the
mornings. I ate I don't know how much steak last night, but I was still hungry
when I woke up today, and I have eaten two PBJ's and I think I have finally
made the association of PBJ and this sort of apthetic, easily distracted, brain
weary state that I am in right now. I can't seem to concentrate on any one
topic for very long, and when I try to I seem to sit here in a blurry haze of
just, I don't know what. Something in the combination of bread, PBJ, and milk,
puts me in this state. I think it might me wise at this point to simply cut the
bread alltogether, and the milk, and the PBJ, and try strictly eating an
omnivore diet, and by that I mean meat and veggies. It is too easy for me to
reach for PBJ in times of hunger and boredom like this, and I think that it
might be the source for a lot of shit for me in my life, so I have decided to
cut it. I am not sure if I would like to cut milk at this point as well, but I
certainly think that these marbled beef cuts that I have found at Sam's could
very well be the solution to a lot of other things that are shitty in my life
right now.

In fact, I find this quite interesting that I have this perception that I have
a lot of shitty things in my life right now. I think it is the food that I have
eaten talking. Right now (and it is the mid-afternoon mind you, and this is
something that happens at this point anyway), I have this strong urge to not
do anything productive at all, as if doing something productive would hurt me
right now, as if doing something like rotating my laundry and cleaning my gi
would somehow be a detriment to my life. In fact, I am quite forcing myself to
continue on writing right now, where if I were to give in to my impulses, I
would be browsing reddit or playing more games of Hearthstone mindless or any
other such pointless task, but instead I am very much forcing myself to keep
writing because I have decided that is what I want to do right now. I keep
glancing down at the clock in the corner of my monitor to see it to be only a
few minutes past the previous time that I looked down at it, and every time I
do so I get this entire sense of dread as though I won't be able to last
another fourty minutes of writing, which if I would seek to aim to get to my
desired goal of one hour of writing a day I would have to reach at this moment
in order to accomplish.

On that subject also, I dread the idea of picking up any book and reading it.
Even just the concept of having something in front of me to process and
comprehend is too much for me right now. I don't give a shit about Achilles in
the Iliad, I don't care if Aeneis makes it to Rome, I couldn't give a flying
fuck about whether or not Mitya is going to kill his father, and Vin and her
magical metal burning powers can go fuck themselves. However, when it comes to
mindlessly watching clickbait youtube videos where people take excerpts from
other peoples channels and put them on their own, that is something I can get
behind. This is something I have always struggled with. Why is it that I feel
comfortable wasting my time doing something that is entirely unproductive, but
at the same time I won't spend that same time doing something productive like
learning Russian, or writing (which I am very much forcing myself to continue
to do right now) or playing the piano, or visiting my father, or anything else?
Why is it that I will stay awake consuming mindless fodder that I know will get
me nowhere in life (or at least, the intention is that it will do nothing for
me) but I won't spend that same time to something that my produce fruit in the
end? Both this writing, and the watching youtube videos each take a minimal
amount of effort. In fact, I could simply have the textbook of Russian words
and shit just open, and I could read the words, and try and pronounce them, and
that would take no more effort on my part than figruing out games of
Hearthstone would, or calculating gear scores or whatever it is in Diablo, but
for some reason I feel compelled to spend my time on the latter rather then the
former. What is that?

I am somewhat convinced, or at least hopeful, that it has to do with the sugars
in the PBJ and milk that I just ate. In fact, not only sugars, but maybe also
whatever processed fats and shit goes into the peanut butter that I ate as
well. I do not beleive it has anything to do with the ibuprofin I have taken,
as Ibu. has never had this effect on me in the past, at least not that I've
noticed. More the reason I can rule out Ibu. is because I have had this sort of
effect on my brain before, and I very much know that I have felt this way
before, and so I feel like it has to have something to do with something that I
have always done. I feel like it has to be diet.

The first time I remember distincly identifying this feeling was in college.
And I know I have had this feeling many times before this moment, but this was
the first moment I remember putting it into my brain. The first time I remember
experiencing this feeling was when I was watching a Carlin standup video, and
as I was listening to the words, it was as if the words were coming at me after
I could process them. It was like he was saying things, and the things he was
saying weren't reaching me until way after he said them, but by the time they
reached me he was already saying different things, and I just couldn't keep up
with what he was saying, and I eventually turned off the video. Now, at the
time of that, I believe I was high, so I attributed that feeling to the feeling
of being high, but now I think I am coming to the realization that that feeling
probably has to do with what I've eaten, and there is no doubt in my mind that
it is very likely that I had eaten a PBJ before that moment of first realizing
about this feeling. So knowing that now, I will entirely cut the PBJ from my
life and the bread and the milk, and work on eating only beef, veggies,
mushrooms, and water and tea from this point forward, and through changing my
diet in that way, I will determine observe if my feelings of discondcordance
has to do with diet or if it has to do with something else. Indeed, it might
just be something that happens to me, but when it happens it doesn't usually
have this sort of effect on me. Right now it feels as though it is having an
actual physical effect on me, and its making me upset and irritated. I am
feeling like the entire act of writing right now is draining me physically. And
it's not the actual act of pressing the keys that's draining me, it just feels
like the fact that I am continuing to type, and the fact that I know I will
plan to continue to type for some amount of time, it is making me wearisome and
filled with dread. Indeed, I don't know how many words I have typed since I
mentioned that I had forty minutes to go, but it feels like I have been saying
words and words and words and words, and that no matter how much I type there
is still just a mountain more that I am going to have to type, and it has only
been fifteen minutes since that point and I feel like I haven't accomplished
anything with it and that there is still this mountain to overcome.

I will take a break and drink some water, because I know I am dehydrated as
well.

Okay, I got up and had some water and have set the pitcher to start filling up
with some more water. I will plan to go back in a few sentences and drink some
more. Just that walking up and drinking some water already made me feel
slightly better, and there is some meta analysis that I want to talk about in
regards to the story of the hermit, so by the time I am finished writing this
paragraph, the pitcher should have finished filling and I will be able to go
and drink a bunch of water, and bring the pitcher with me, and drink out of the
pitcher in a steady pace while I write.

I just went to check on the pitcher, and it is not done filling, but is still
draining through the filter and into the pitcher. Indeed, I don't want to
start writing on any chain of thought, because I so hate having my chains of
thought become inturrupted by things such as getting up to grab water, so that
is the purpose of this paragraph, to give myself more time as filler in between
the grabbing of the water and the actual writing of my ideas.

Okay, I'm back now with the pitcher of water in front of me. I will say that
the feeling of the feeling going away was merely psycho somatic, as I can
garuntee that the feeling is still there. However, having some water certainly
helps that feeling, and I feel as more towards the end of the spectrum of
"doing productive things is not painful" anymore, and less on the rather
strange end of "doing productive things is pointless and painful and not worth
it". So let's talk about the tale of my hermit.

So far, what my idea of the tale of the hermit has come to is this. I have my
four characters, one of which is a brutish man, the sort of man who is an
aggressive athiest, and will justify his contempable actions by saying things
like "well if there is no god that means we can do whatever we want with no
consequences". And I want my intelligent and open Christian to be a girl. What
sort of girl this is I do not know yet. There are two ways I could go with
this, and one would be that this girl is a sort of "born-again" Chirstian, and
that she used to live a sinful or dreadful life, perhaps burdened by addiction
or promiscuosness (which is certainly a female sin much more than it is a male
one) or some other such thing and that she found Christianity and through that
she found her ways. I think this would make more sense as the dogmatic
Christian, which would make the most sense since this is the one I would have
be the most tied to her faith. So that has those two characters pretty well
defined in an extremely broad sense.

For the other two characters, I want to have the open minded athiest or
agnostic be a male, and the open minded Christian be a female. I really like
the idea of the open minded Christian being someone who was born in raised in a
good household, having the sort of parents that were also Christian, but they
were the good sorts of Christians who would go to church but would always let
their daughter decide if she wanted to join them on Sunday's or whatever. And
maybe I could talk about how on some Sundays she decided not to go, simply
because she didn't feel like it or whatever, but she always felt guilty about
it, and even more so because it seemed like her parents were perfectly happy
with her not going, and in their abscence she could feel the presence of god
speak within her, and the devil, rather just the devil, and she could feel the
devil work within her, and she would feel great guilt at her decision, as if
she were turning her back on god. She could even have a moment in one of these
times where she looked upon a cross or something else that was displayed in
their house, and upon looking at the cross she would feel great anguish, as if
she herself were guilty for the death of Jesus, as the church would have us
believe. So that would be the story for my open Christian character.

And that leaves lastly the Agnostic, or the Open Athiest, or whatever other
Character. This Character I want to have the background be very similar to
mine, with parents that were horrible Christians, and he constantly had
Christianity shoved down his throat. He went through a period of rebellion, and
contempt for the world, he went and lived in his car in Seattle and got
involved with pchedelics, and through that he has kept an open mind about all
religion, but only to the extent that the religion will match with what he
knows about the world. This Character might say something like "The fact that
there is an invisible man in the sky that created us is no more unreasonable
than the idea that we all were born up out of the chaos of the universe, and
the facts of these matters on obscures the hidden truth which is what we should
all strive to find" or something like that.

And now that I have these four characters, somewhat fleshed out but not in an
entirely satisfactory manner, I lastly want to talk about the hermit. I still
haven't decided what I want this "manifesto of the hermit" to be. What I have
written above, a few days ago, talking about spirits and gods, leading up to
the spirit of Adam which is the spirit I first want to create in my mythology
as the spirit or god that brought life into man, and is the father of all the
other gods, does not fit into the original idea of this story. The original
idea of the story was that this hermit wrote this manifesto, or his magnum
opus, or whatever, in the isolation of his cottage, and in this magnum opus,
the idea was that he had visions of this other world, and in this other world,
he was able to make predictions about this world. The idea of the story then,
is that all of these characters would read this magnum opus, these visions,
ramblings of a hermit, whatever you want to call them, and after they had read
them they became entirely true, undeniably true, to the point where it would be
unreasonable not to accept the ramblings of the hermit to be the actual nature
of the universe. The idea then is that, in this sort of undeniable evidence, I
want to show the reactions and interactions of my four characters as they try
and cope with and understand what they have read.

I like this concept and I don't all at the same time. On the one hand, it could
make for an interesting read. On the other hand, it seems much too cute.
Perhaps what I have to do is make the ramblings of the hermit seperate from my
mythology. Because I have a great love for mythology in my mind, I always have
since the first time I read of the greeks and the greek myths, and I don't want
it to be reduced to this sort of "undeniable truth". Such a reduction is for
things like physics, things that you can make experiments for and such. So
perhaps these ramblings of the hermit, maybe it has to be entirely seperate.

And I guess that's where I am struggling. In another sense, this mythology I
have in my head has to do with a sort of fantasy world that I want to create.
Indeed, the Iliad very much takes place in a fantasy world, especially in the
sense that the gods actually interact with the regular man, and while I do have
something like that in my mind as to what I want my story and my mythology to
be, to mix it up with this sort of ramblings of the hermit seems wrong. Before
I begin to write on this story, I need to straighten out in my head what the
world of the hermit should be, what the world of my mythology is, and if they
should intersect at all.

I think what makes the most sense is to write a sort of writers epilogue. I
deem it important to provide a commentary in addition to the story. Such a
thing could work, I think, as I feel it is neccesary due to the absurdness of
the story. It goes against the "show don't tell" principle of writing, but in
this case I think, since this story will be much too cute otherwise, I deem it
neccesary to talk about the absurdity of a hermit coming up with the meaning of
the universe and being able to write it down.

So to summarize my meta-brainstorming on this subject, what I am left with is
this. I want there to be a Hermit, and this Hermit writes a document detailing
out the nature of the world. One of the critical features of this document will
be the renouncement of Christianity as a valid system, and the proposition of
some other sort of god. In this ficional world (very fictional, that will have
to be noted in the commentary just how absurdly fictional this sort of scenario
is) this hermit has actually visited another realm, and in this realm he met an
actual being, and the being proved to him that the entire things was real by
giving him a sequence of events that will happen in a certain way. This hermit
than records these events, and that is what is left in "The Ramblings of a
Hermit". I would even like this Hermit to mention at the end that he can only
have faith that the vision he has are correct, and that he knows that he will
die. I want a principle feature of this also to be some set rules about the
afterlife, maybe it's not structured like heaven and hell, but rather in some
other way, and in this way the hermit will be able to see what is going on. So,
in this entirely absurd scenario, the hermit makes his manifesto, puts it away,
and proceeds to die. It is not until many decades later, long long after the
hermit has died, that these four characters find this manifesto, and they each
read it in their turn. I want in there to be the recording of some events which
happened before their time, and then I want there to be some mentions of
events, very specific events so as to eliminate ambiguity. I want these four
charcters to be called out by name, even, for their date of births to recorded,
even perhaps the names of their parents. I then want some event that these four
took part in together, that they took part in together, (perhaps they murdered
someone, ooooooh, I like that a lot) and I want the details of that event, that
murder, to be told out in detail. I then want these characters to discuss this,
and its implications. The conversation will have to be discovered, I could not
begin to write an outline for them, but essentially the whole point of this
work would be to write the interactions of these four characters as they
discuss the implications of these visions of the hermit. I only just came up
with the idea of murder, but that gives this story so much more weight. I love
it. It also entirely divorces my story from the actual mythology that I want to
create. So the ramblings of a hermit as I think about them now, compared to the
ramblings of *this* hermit, these two are entirely different hermits in
entirely different stories.

I like it, this story is starting to gain traction for me, and I am curious to
see where it could go.

Well, it is interesting, I have gone twenty minutes past my alloted time now.
It's amazing what I little water can do for the soul. I do think I will decide
to forgoe bread, PBJ, and milk, for at least a few days. I might add milk back
in and only at night just because I have some milk in my fridge right now and I
don't want it to go bad, but I don't feel bad throwing out the six or eight
slices of bread I have, and the peanut butter and jelly won't go bad, so I will
try and do better about sticking to this diet. I will combine it with IF as
well. So mushroom with avocado, beef, and some veggies, with tea and lots of
water (I'll have to figure out more veggies). I like it.

Now to Hearthstone.


