# 20181012
So this is a dream that I actually had a couple of nights ago, and I was so
astounded by it that I couldn't really write it down or anything. It seemed
wrong to write it down almost. I know that's a strange thing to say, but it's
what happened. There was also an element of laziness, in that I have gotten
exhausted of writing lately, and I didn't want to write just because writing is
hard, but regardless of the reason, this is a very profound dream to me, and I
want to write it out now.

I have spoken the dream out into my phone, and I have listened back to that
recording once since I had the dream, but as of right now, it is in the
morning a few days after I had the dream, and I haven't listened to the
recording. I want to try and remember and describe the scene of the dream as
much as I can, and if it matches with what I immediately recollected in the
recording, then so much the better.

So I mentioned this in the recording as well, and I mention it here because it
is a relevant fact, but it's a little strange to say at this point, because it
is something that I only really articulated explicitely after I woke up, but
it's still there regardless of when it came into being, and it feels more
appropiate to put it here at the outset then to put it together at the end.
This dream was the third of a trilogy. That is, the plot of the dream, and
everything that went on in the dream, happened as if we knew about the
characters and locations of the first two dreams, and now in the third dream,
these things are just a given, and the plot resumes where the second dream left
off.

Now, I have not had the first two dreams of this trilogy, nor do I think I will
in the future, (although I might), but this notion that this dream is the third
of a trilogy is simply just there. It came to me as I woke up, and was trying
to remember the dream, and I thought, "this is the third dream of a trilogy".
And since Star Wars is a somewhat prominent theme in the beginning of the
dream, it's almost a sort of notion of "how Star Wars should have ended"
although the dream is so far removed from Star Wars that it can't really be
tied to that franchise in a concrete way. There are lightsabers, Darth Sidious,
and Darth Vader, and beyond those three things, there is no tie to the Star
Wars universe. Granted, lightsabers are a pretty big deal, but if I were to
write the story, it would be something besides the lightsaber that I would use.
Or maybe I would just have to blatently rip off of Star Wars if I were to
actually write this story, because I don't think the symbolism works without
the lightsaber.

So the dream begins on a floating resort in space. This thing is not even in
orbit of any planet. It is literally like a floating space resort room, self
contained in space. It has a layout similar to most very fancy hotel rooms.
From the area that you  first walk in to the thing, there is a narrow hallway,
and to the right is a closet, and to the left is a kitchen area. Then, straight
ahead is a tv, and to the right past the closet would be some couches that turn
into beds. The room is more like a suite without a bed than it is a bedroom.

Once you walk in, to the left is a sliding glass door that goes to an outside
area. This outside area has a large circular platform, which the recreational
use would be for sitting and observing the stars and genearally just relaxing,
but we end up using this rectangular area as an arena. This outside area is
where teh dream begins. In the dream is me, and Kyle, and our mom and dad. We
have tracked Darth Sidious to this resort. I am Darth Vader, but it's clear in
the past installments that I am struggling with my master Darth Sidious, and I
have betrayed him and his cause. I have not "converted to the light side" but I
have decided that the path that Sidious wants to take is incorrect, and that I
rejoin my brother and fight him.

So the dream begins, and Sidious is on the platform. He has conjured up a sort
of genie lamp, and inside the genie lamp, he has placed in it an alternate
universe, or you could even argue that it is THE alternate universe, and he has
managed to capture it into a genie lamp. He is at this location, because it was
a good location, isolated and remote where he thought he covered his tracks,
where he could finish his project here, but we were able to trace him to this
location.

As we confront him, we make the agreement that we will fight like gentleman,
according to the rules of fairness, and this makes sense to all of us. As a
result, Kyle agrees and is eager to confront him first. The fight I remember
being short. I was inside the resort, and watched as Kyle attempted to get the
best of Sidious. However, Sidious simply sidesteps Kyle's attack, and then
kicks off of the platform, sending him hurling untethered, into space.

I go outside, and kneel on the side of the arena there. I watch as Kyle's body
goes out of site, knowing that I am helpless to do anything to save him. As I
am watching this, I am resolved to stop Sidious from his plans.

At this moment, Sidious comes up behind me, and places his hand on my shoulder.
He make a sort of appeal, saying he will take me back, and he tells me what a
team we would make. As his hand is resting on my shoulder, I gather a feeling
of rage, and I take my lightsaber and a cut his hand. I thrust it up into his
hand, almost as if through the upward of the fingernails. In that direction, I
cut his hand. I turn around, and continue up through the hand, and into his
forarm, cutting through his left arm, creating a sort of pattern with the slice
through the arm. I then pull that out, and I thrust my lightsaber up through
the roof of his mouth. I put my lightsaber inside his mouth, and thrust it all
the way through the roof of his mouth, and through the brains, and up out of
the skull. This was rather graphic in the dream, and I am making no
exagerattion about what I did. I then grasped my lightsaber as if it were a
handle, and flung around his body, and let it slide off of my lightsaber as it
flung across and over the ledge into space, where the carcass continued to fly
off into space.

I watched this carcass go into space for a little bit, and I continued to think
about Kyle's fate, and how he might be saved. I reason that he was not
punctured or piecrecd in any way, only thrown into space. I also no, from
previous installments of this trilogy, that Kyle has the ability to hold his
breath in space for inhuman lengths of time. However, I know that we are not in
orbit of any planet or anything like that, so I reason that there is a very low
probability that he actually hits anything in space.

As I am thinking through these things, my mom comes outside, and starts
muttering things in an excited manner. She starts saying things like, "Oh,
tha's amazing, you defeated him, he's defeated, that's so great" and things
like that, and is celebrating the defeat of Darth Sidious. And I tell her "sh,
I am trying to reach Kyle through the force, please be quiet." My mom, at this
request, becomes more quiet in her celebration, and starts whispering her
excitment instead of yelling it. I tell her, "Please stop making any noise" and
she goes to the point where she is whispering under her breathe. I can still
hear her though, but decide to focus on the force as best I can with her like
that.

I say, "There still might be a chance that Kyle is alive." I tell my mom about
his powers of breathing for inordinant amounts of time, but also that the
chances he landed anywhere are very slim, and even if he did land somewhere,
it's probably some sort of unlivable hell-scape (that is the term I used) with
lava and magma and even when he lands on a place like this, he probably won't
have any air there anyway, so he will eventually suffocate. My mom is rather
taken by this, saying "well can he still be saved" and to this I say that yes,
he can, but it's very unlikely that we will be able to find him or that he
survives.

Also, at some point in there, I don't remember exactly when, I remember
thinking, "But, this is just the beginning of the dream, and I've already
killed the bad guy, what more is going to happen in the dream?" It's around
that point that I resolve to find Kyle. I think it's actually my mom who says
something like that.

At this, my mom goes back inside, and I have something of a plan to save Kyle.
I grab the genie lamp, and I look inside it for a bit, and I see a sort of orb
of this alternate universe. I know I don't want to simply let it out, although
I have a suspicion that it will be useful to me. And besides, a genie lamp with
an alternate reality in it isn't something that you want to just have laying
around. So I pick it up and take it with me.

Also, propped up on a stand is my Darth Vader mask and costume. In something of
an act of symbolism, I thrust through the mask in the same way that I killed
Darth Sidious, and I destroy the mask and costume in the same way that I
destroyed Darth Sidious.

So with this universe now in hand, I go back into the resort, and the three of
us, mom dad and me, leave the resort and return to one of the planets there.
This planet requires description, because it is most peculiar. Everything about
the planet is like a cartoon almost in its perfectness. The buildings are all
regular and perfectly shaded, and the grass is peculiarly green. There is some
sort of structure to the place, and it's not just regularity patterns the whole
way through, but there is something peculiar about the place. It is something
about the doing of Darth Sidous, which has taken place in the previous
installments of the trilogy, that caused this place to take this form. In other
words, I'm not sure what the "before" of this place looks like, but it has
certainly been effected by the doings of the previous installments.

So we return to this planet, and some of my family is timidly hopeful of good
new on our return. My uncle Chuck, Grandfather, and some other auxilerry dream
people are there, and I tell this group about what happened. I say that Darth
Sidious has been defeated, but that Kyle was lost in space. Everyone then comes
up with this plan to create an "afterlife card" for him. An afterlife card is a
card that you can send to someone who you presume to be dead, to wish their
soul the best wishes in the afterlife. So I agree to bring the afterlife card
to Kyle. So I get an afterlife card, and pass it around to everyone, who is
signing it. However, when it gets to Evan, Evan asks me why I haven't signed
it. I tell him, because I believe Kyle is not dead, and that this afterlife
card is not neccessary. So Evan refuses to sign because I refused to sign it.

This entire time, as I am telling my family about what happened, and also
passing around the afterlife card, I am thinking about what may have happened
to Kyle. Eventually, it clicks to me what happened, and what I need to do.
After everyone had signed the afterlife card, we all get into different space
ships, and we make our way out into space to send the afterlife card to Kyle.

I am not sure on the details about how the afterlife card works, but what it
comes down to is you can get to a certain point in space, close to the center
of the universe, where everything is attracted inward towards it, and you can
throw the afterlife card in, and that's how you deliver the afterlife card.

So we are on this journey now to get the afterlife card to Kyle, and as we are
going, I know what I must do. I realize that if Kyle is alive, and I know it to
be true that he is, that he must have floated for a time, until he eventually
came to the center of the universe. And if he came to the center of the
universe, than I need to make that center of the universe a place that can be
lived in in order to save Kyle.

However, I know that those with me won't understand or agree with my plan. So I
decide to defect from their doings, and go my own way. There is a short escape
sequence, where first I fly off at the greatest speed I can, and when they
chase me, I hide around the corners of planets, and I put out flak and things
like that, to get them off of my tail. Eventually, with the genie lamp and the
afterlife card in my hand, I manage to escape from my family so that they have
no idea where I am or what my plans are.

So now that I am alone, I begin to fly toward the center of the universe. When
I get there, around me are planets of various sizes and stars, but at the
center of the universe is something like an orb. This orb, you can look around,
and you can see the outline of the universe in this orb. It's hard to describe,
but it's as if the orb were full of the stars in this universe, but contianed
in itself, and that is why everything was being attracted to this orb, because
it already contains everything in the universe, and the things in the universe
are merely being attracted to themselves. It's something like that anyway.

So there is this orb, and it looks like a sort of Space Ball that's rotating
and when you look in to it, it's as if you are looking into the entire universe
itself. It's similar to the cover of the book in the library that I saw that
had the story of FF6 in it.

So I fly straight into the center of this ball, and I let the force of it take
me. And right as I am crossing the threshold of the universe and the center of
the universe, I unleash the alternate universe in the genie lamp.

When I do, something amazing happens. First, the universe ball inside the genie
lamp expands to the size of the center of the universe, and goes through it.
As this ball of the alternate universe goes over the center of the universe, it
creates the form of the entire alternate universe inside of the center of the
universe. So what happens from my perspective is, the ball of the alternate
universe goes over the center of the univeres, and the universe that I become a
part of now, since I am going into the center of the universe, is this
alternate universe. And now that I am in this alternate universe, the ball that
was traveling through continues to travel through this alternate universe, and
it goes from the location in the alternate universe that I land in, and begins
to travel to become the center of the alternate universe.

And as the ball continues to travel to become the center of the alternate
universe, it passes through a sort of globe that exists in the alternate
universe. This globe of the alternate universe is the globe of the earth. It
represents the earth of the "real" universe, the universe that I was born in,
and this alternate ball passes through that. When that happens, it takes the
globe with it, so that the globe in the alternate universe gets taken with the
ball of the genie lamp to be a part of the center of this new alternate
universe.

It's all very convoluted, but when it happened in the dream, it all just
happened, and it made since. There were so many things that happened at once,
but I knew that this was the thing that needed to be done, and the way that it
all happened made sense to me in the way that it is happening. If I had any
skill with animation, I could animate it perfectly, but it's so hard to
describe in words what happened. But it's such a profound concept, and I must
bring this to reality in some way. The best way that I know how now is by
describing it in this way, but I will have to think about the best way to
represent this image of "opening pandoras box at the center of the universe" to
light, because it is something that I feel is the key to understanding the
world we live in.

So afetr all of this happens, I am now existing in this alternate universe. I
want to describe it a bit. Its something like the planet from the first
universe, in that everything is uniform in a sense. There are houses and green
grass, and things like this. But the stark difference here is that things are
not orderly. In fact, things are much more organic. Mind you, it is still
clean, but the houses are not in rows, and instead, it feels like every place
here has it's own purpose. Instead of placing things in rows, the people of
this universe built things as they needed them.

So standing there, I run into Kyle. I come up to him, and I embrace him, and I
said, "I knew you were alive." He then starts to explain that, when he got
kicked into space, he knew his fate, and he said that he would either "hold his
breath until he ran out of breath or until he came to somewhere he could
breathe" He said it was never an option to him to come to let go of his breath.

So in this new universe, Kyle decided to put together a Noon-gang. But he said
it's sort of difficult, because the people in this universe don't really have a
noon-gang, and don't know what it means. But he felt that it was important to
have some semblance of the other universe in this one, just for his own sanity.
I said that I liked that, and that I would like to become a part of the noon
gang.

There is also one last thing that I want to mention. This is something that
I will have to listen back to the recording to fully understand, but I remember
there being a field, the field that noon-gang was to take place on, and on the
edges of the field, there were tables, fold out tables, that had wine on them.
And what I do remember about this, was the wine was not in bottles, but it was
like wine was dripping off of these tables. That's a last little detail, that I
honestly have no clue what to make of it. Everything in the dream makes so much
sense to me, all up to that point. The first association I have of that is the
notion of blood, but that seems wrong, that doesn't resonate with me. What
resonates with me more is the God Dionysious, but I don't know for what purpose
that god might be represented in that way at this part of the dream. I don't
really understand that part of the dream at all.

The last thing I want to say, is that there was some pretty epic music towards
the end of the dream. Like, epic happy music, with violins and piano's and
such. I don't remember what it sounds like, and I might have had a better idea
what it sounded like the morning of the dream itself, but it was there.

So that's it, that's the dream. Such an amazing dream, with so much good stuff
to unpack. The fact that I was able to defeat Darth Sidious, escape my family
with a plan, and execute the opening of Pandora's Box in the correct way, that
gives me hope for where I am in my life right now. There is surely a lot of
work to be done, but I am on that path, I can feel it. This dream gives me
courage. I must continue along my journey of understanding myself, so taht I
can be better equipped to understanding this dream. It's an amazing dream, and
I am so grateful to have had it.
