So last night I had a rather complicated dream about my Anima (or at least I
think it was) but when I woke up, I thought to myself, "This will be a
difficult one to remember" and while I do remember most of the ending of the
dream, the whole sequence leading up to it is a bit obscured. But I'll do my
best to work through it.

So the dream begins in a house. It's hard to describe this house because it
doesn't resemble any house I have been in before off the top of my head, and I
haven't been in this house in previous dreams. Actually, the layout of it is
similar to Jason and Lacey's house, except the front door is where the backdoor
is, and the living room/kitchen area is not as big or pronounced in the dream.

Something also to note is that this dream is set in the 1880s. I don't know why
that is, but that decade is very prominant in my head as the decade of this
dream.

So I walk in to the house with the intent of killing someone. He is sitting in
one of the bedrooms. This is the part of the dream that is a little hazy. In
this part, I think the intent is to either rehearse, or reenact, or in some way
practice the killing of this man. And since I know it's a rehersal, or
whatever, I decide to, in this case, not kill him here but instead take him
outside.

So we go outside, and we walk around. There is an old town, and then, there is
a place like a futuristic ball-park. I take him there, and I remember trying to
talk with him for a bit. There was someone else there, and that someone else
asked me who this was and what I was doing here. When I explained to him, he
informed me that this needed to get a move on.

Something weird I remember at this point had something to do with a dozen or so
versions of this character. The character in some way split into a bunch of
different iterations, and I had to kill every one of them. It was something
where I just remember this sort of image.

Anyway, after that was done, I went back to the house. When I got in there,
there was a girl there. This is the girl that I think in some way represents
the anima, although I could be wrong. Anyway, when I got in, she asked me what
I was doing, and I said that it was none of her business, and that she should
mind herself.

I went in to the other room, and I went to kill the man, and when I did, I
killed him in the stomach (with an antique gun I think) and his top half was in
some way seperated from his bottom.

When this was happening, the girl who confronted me at the front door was
following me. She was on to me and what I was doing, and when I killed the man,
she said something like, "Ah, I knew it, I knew this is what you were here for,
you just had to do this didn't you."

She then took me, with someone else, like a right hand man for her, and both of
them forced me at gunpoint into the living room. I was wearing a fancy 1880s
suit as well, and she started frisking me down, looking for weapons. She took
off my jacket and started patting me down under the arms and such. She was
being erotic about it, but I was mostly concerned with thinking about some way
to escape, but her right hand man was honed in on me, and I couldn't do
anything. She then unbuttoned my pants to check, exposing my genitals for a
moment. I then made a comment, "Why don't you go ahead and suck my dick while
you're at it." She licked the tip playfully, and put the head in her mouth and
sucked for a bit, before she put it away, and put my pants back on. I remember
when she did that, I remember thinking, "This isn't where this is going, is it?
She seems legitamately interested." I guess, what threw me off is I was
expecting her to, at best, make a sly comment, but this sort of playfullness
was unexpected for the situation.

Regardless, after she put it away, I remember saying something like, "You know
it had to happen, if it wasn't me, it would have been someone else." She said,
"I understand, and you must know that because it was you, I have to do this
now." Then she said, "He's not carrying anything," and then she shot me.

I'm pretty sure it was her who shot me, and not her bodyguard. She had a rifle,
similar to the one I used.

I remember, for a breif moment after she shot me, the sort of "my life flashed
before my eyes" thing happened, and I saw the man I killed, I saw the
consequences of "that needed to be done" (whatever the hell that means) and I
felt like, "Well, this sort of shit happens" as I was shot.

I woke up, and immediately realized that this dream needed to be written down,
but that it would be hard to do that due to the nature of the dream. I've
written it down as best I can remember.

The second dream I had was reconnecting with Tim Franda. The most notable
thing about this dream was the starting location, being in that futuristic
train station place that I've had other dreams, and then as we caught up, he
asked me about my job and I told him that I've been working there for a year
and a half now, and we walked through the city, which had roads like stair
steps paralell to eachother, and we got to an apartment which was like a room,
with a door to the left like the old school camp that led to a balcony, and we
went in there, and I asked him how he was doing. That was the extent of that
dream.
