# 20180810
So today I am doing something interesting. I woke up about 5:30, and I had a
dream, and now, after watching a few more scenes of The Shining (the boy and
the man just got possessed by the old woman) I have decided to write my dream
out. It's a very interesting dream. Or at least, it's interesting in a certain
sense. Let me just write out the dream.

So this dream entirely takes place in a dream version of FFXIV. It's been a
while since I had a dream about that, and well, Ciara, and not just her, but by
notion of the idea of being a boyfriend, and my lack of experince thereof, has
become a primary fragment of my thoughts of late, and well, I think that is
somewhat reflected in this dream.

The dream started in outside the house, the mansion that Luci owned when I
played the game, in the beach district. I was there, and I remember logging in
to the game, and I was my warrior character, and I remember getting on to the
group chat of the people there, and well, I remember going back and reading
some of the chat. Primary to the conversation was Msyu, and I don't remember
the things that Msyu said, although I remember it was something to do with
something practical, and it had Msyu faces like any good msyu chat had. Msyu
would never get on voice, for reasons that he/she was very good at deflecting,
but we would always come to understand him from the way he would post various
ascii faces in the chat. He was very good at using them to convey his feelings.
Anyway, among the chat was of course, Ciara. She had something to say in the
chat, again I don't know what, but I'm sure it was something very Ciara like,
something that she was insecure about in what Msyu was saying. She said these
things a lot, and it was just how she talked, by expressing her immaturaties
and justifying herself when they came to light. Anyway, I remember reading
that, and I clicked "reply" to it, just hoping that it would bring up an empty
message. This is something I would do at time, I would try and reply or simply
tell her something, and I would bring up the chat window and type what ever was
on my mind, and then when it was all typed out I would press delete and
wouldn't send the message. Well, when I hit reply on this particular chat (it
was some new chat system, the whole thing has been updated since I last played,
or at least, it was in the dream and I assume that it most definitely has been
in the game as well) it brought up the box immedietly, and when I didn't type
anything, and I tried to delete it, I accidentally sent intsead. So I was
logged in to the game, and I had sent Ciara a blank message. She immedietly
replied with something "OMG Delita! It's amazing, you've come back to the
game." At that point, I said something like, yeah, but I'm still level 60, and
I have all of my old gear. She then said, oh, okay, well I'll leave you to
leveling," and I went off to play the game.

I remember going through some of the game world. I remember, the area was like
the sea of clouds a little bit, although with a lot bigger islands, and islands
with walls and things. It was more like some of the scenes in Neverwinter now
that I think about it. Almost exactly now that I think about it. I roamed
around this area, and did some leveling, and I made it from level 60 to level
61, and from there, I started attempting solo some of the bosses that had
become outdated (but were new to me). That is something you can do, in FF, is
you can go back and solo old bosses, it's a fun pasttime. Anyway, I remember I
had decided to level up as Sora, using the keyblade, instead of Warrior. That
detail is certainly relevent somehow, but I don't want to dwell on it. I
remember coming up to a certain boss, and I entered the arena, and the way this
boss was constructed was this. It had to eyes, essentially, and a nose, and if
you locked on to the eyes, you could attack them reletively easily. So I
started fighting this boss, and I started just by using a brute force strategy.
I just started attacking one of the eyes, and it's health went down quickly. It
had a health bar like the bosses in kingdom hearts do, and it went from orange
to yellow to green, until it became depleted, and that eye went down rather
quickly. When I took that eye down, I then started work on the other eye, but I
quickly realized that this eye would not be taken down so easily. I then
remember some advice about this boss that I had heard earlier from a guy, I
forget his name, he was one of the advisors on Elysium, he helped the world
first team come up with strats but he didn't play with them. I also remember
that he attempted suicide, and that he was hospitalized one time for his
attempts. I wish I remember his name, but it might come to me. I could try the
Fruedian technique of writing out all of the names I think of, because this
name is certianly in my knowledge.

Regardless, I remembered at that moment that this guy had given advice
concerning the killing of this monster, and he said something like, "make sure
you kill the eyes simultaneously" or else you'll have a rough time. It can be
done, but it's easier if you deplete them simultaneously.

Well, of course I remembered this advice after I had already killed one of the
eyes. This sort of mechanic, this sort of thing is something that was a fairly
easy mechanic to do, and I was not at all surprised that this was how this boss
was designed. Well, I started to come up with ways now at this point with how
to attack this eye. I remember, the concept of "locking on with triangle" that
was something that I think has to be taken from FFXV, because Triangle was the
default attack button, but I changed it to R2, but it behaved exactly like the
attack feature should behave. And so, I remember trying just to attack the
second eye, but it consantly was warding of the attacks with attacks of it's
own, and I would get knocked back and frustrated at the futility of trying to
attack this thing.

I then remember stepping back a bit, and standing on the tail.

I have to step back, I don't believe I have described the scene. So this boss
was at the edge of one of the islands. It was like these two eyes were each
floating on an invisible wall. There was a dividing line, and on each side was
an eye. The eyes, they were each about the height of my character, of me,
perhaps a little taller, and they were complete spheres. They had eye-lids and
everything, and they would blink, but the eyelid encompassed the entire eye, so
that it was a pouch. This is the sort of thing you would expect from a video
game design.

So anyway, as I killed the first eye, the eyes to this point had stayed on each
side of the wall, on their respective sides, but now that I killed one of them,
the second one was now free to move across the entire plane of existance there.
So that is what it was doing, and I remember attacking it when it reached the
center, because the center was the easiest place to stand, and it would attack
me back and thwart me. I then remember thinking, "Okay, this boss is outdated,
but I am still undergeared to be fighting it solo, and I have messed up the
strategy" so I stepped back and noticed that it had a sort of tail, or foot. At
the center section, was a sort of tail of the boss. I then attempted just to
stand on this tail, and when I stood on it, the eye would open, and it would
move to "the wrong side," the side of the eye that I killed first, and it would
stay there, and it would almost smile at me. The eye wasn't smiling, but the
boss had a sort of stupid grin. Anyway, I remember seeing this and thinking,
"well that doesn't do me much good, that's supposed to be how a team would beat
this eye, but I'm fighting it solo, so in order to attack I have to step off of
teh tail, the eye is too far away to attack from the tail, so I have to come up
with a different strategy.

Well, I never did come up with a different strategy, and I woke up at about
this point.
