# 20180912
So I have been less inspired to write in here lately. You can tell by my less
verbose entries and such that I really just don't have as much desire to write
everything that is on my mind.

I'm not sure what it is. I am not able to focus or concentrate at all on
anything lately. I am tired, is part of it. I want to be able to have something
that I can do, but then as I do it my mind is telling me to stop doing it, and
it's doing so very strongly, much more strongly than it ever has in the past.

I'm not sure what to make of this. Part of it is, I don't have a purpose with
my actions. That is, right now, I am working on my lit analyzer, and I have
started working on the frontend of it, to get it to the point where I can make
the elms and such from a more user friendly frontend version, as oppossed to
manually tagging a bunch of things in the markdown, but I'm not sure exactly
what it is that I am doing, and I am having the issue that I can't match up
what I think I want with the framework of how I want to do it.

I'm not so sure about the way that I have made the options. On the one hand, I
very much like the way that I have made the litoptions a series of delegates
that get called, and I can change any one of them to tweak the functionality of
the program. On the other end, this makes things difficult for two reasons.
Firstly, when it comes to trying to talk about the stacktrace of something, the
static analyzer built in to VS doesn't recognize (rightly so) which function
exactly to go to when I try and navigate to a function, so there are a bunch of
unneccesary steps to try and trace exactly what is happening with the parsing
and the writing. I am pretty sure I have things pretty modularized, but at the
same time, I don't really know, and since there are a bunch of steps involved,
I really think that I have overdone myself.

Also, I have this issue as well. Since I sort of worked backward on this, I
have started with "The concrete functions that created exactly what I wanted"
and then worked backwards, I have this feeling that, when it comes to creating
different concrete interpetations of my parsing tool, it won't work, and I will
have to wrestle with the notion altering my abstract framework.

It might make the most sense, now that I am thinking about it now, to start
over one more time.

Currently, I have a few things that I don't like about how I have implemented
this.

Firstly, the way that I have handled the source I think is incorrect. What I
have right now is, I have two ways that can become discordant, for talking
about the source. I have the MDSourceFile, and I have the LitElm. I don't think
the LitElm should create the source, rather, I think it should reference a
MDSourceFile. This seems correct to me, now that I think about it.

The problem is, then, I do want to be able to tie the litelm with some sort of
text. That is, I don't want my litelms to be simply a structure of trees, I
want to be able to say, "This litelm is associated with this text." But the
problem then becomes finding the way to best represent that.

I am tempted to say that the delegate approach I have taken is probably
inferior in ways to a simple interface design. The interface design would
probably work better, because then it would split up the way that things are
modularized.

I think what I am getting at is, I am hitting a little closer to home with the
way that I have put together this design, but I need to come at it from the
other angle. I need to start with the abstract design now, and then bring it
down to the concrete from there.

I'm not so sure an entire rework is needed though. I think it is not. Rather, I
just need to rethink the way that I go about associating the LitElms with the
source.


