# 20180825
So last night an interesting thing happenend to me. I got home from work, and
started reading the grand inquizitor chapter out of the brothers Karamazov. I
remember, reading it the first time, I was a little peeved and daunted by how
long one of the paragraphs was, it spans probably 200 lines at least, which
ammounts to about six pages, and I decided that I didn't really care about the
story itself. I felt that I was getting teh point, that Ivan was making some
grand point about Chirstiantiy and Jesus or something, and that was all I
really cared about. I was more concerned with the way the plot unfolded at the
time, more than I was concerned with this particular stoy.

But now, having finished reading the Brother's Karamazov from beginning to end,
for the most part, I went back to read and try and deeply understand that
chapter, and well, I have discovered that that 200 page long paragraph has to
do with Jesus wanderings in the desert. Mostly, it has to do with the
interepretation of those chapters as the freedom of man, and the inquizitor
questions Jesus on teh basis that man can not bear the burden of freedom, and
that Jesus failed in his teachings, but the inquizition is seeking to take
freedom from man, but give them back the illusion of freedom. Something like
that. I still didn't totally grasp it all, and I am giving it a very false sort
of interpretation. I know I don't fully understand the meaning of the piece,
and it's important to remember, very important actually, that this is a piece
not by dostoevsky, but by Ivan Fyodorovitch in dostoevsky's novel. All things
said, it's an interesting think piece, one that I think, on second read, I am
not overly fond of, but interesting non the less, and a very good
characterization of Ivan in the novel.

However, my point of saying all of this was not to talk about this paragraph at
all. As I sat there, it was probably six or six thirty, and I was reading this
paragraph, I suddenly got the deepest urge to sleep. I fell asleep right there
on the couch, and I remember resisting the sleep, and I suddenly startled
myself awake with a twitch, at which point, I decided to simply lay down and go
to sleep.

So I went to sleep at that moment. I know, that this sort of sleep, in this
sleep, I didn't dream so much as I thought. I don't remember where my thoughts
went, but I had some thoughts, I was working through things, and I was
observent of being able to work through them, but I wholly forgot what exactly
it was that I was working through. I woke up, and when I woke up it was dark,
to be expected, and I knew that I would not be able to sleep this night. It's
unfortunate, but I knew it to be the case. It would be late before I could go
to sleep again.

Well, in this time, after I ate some steak, I came back, and I worked on my lit
analyzer. I have now gotten to the point where it is now a releasable thing. I
put the executable on my machine, pointed my path to that folder, and ran the
lit analyzer with certain arguments, and the thing ran. It ran, and it parsed,
and it did everything I wanted it to do.

So maybe I was sorting all of that out in my head, and that's why it just sort
of completed itself in my lap. That could make sense, but I know that dreams
always have more nuance than that.

Eventually, I fell asleep at around five, and woke up at around nine. It is ten
forty five now, and I am not sure what I want to do with my day. It is
difficult for me to be productive.

Just now, a couple of lines ago, I wholly distracted myself with eating
something. I then got on the piano and played some chopin, some sort of mild
practice on the ballade number 1. That indicates something. It indicates that I
am trying to avoid something.

Well, the thing I am trying to avoid is obvious. I want to write about, right
now, what is holding me back. It is difficult, but I know it will be helpful.
Such a thing is so painful. I don't want to reveal the layers underneath myself
that make me who I am afraid of. I am afraid of myself. I want to discover
myself, but in doing, I am afraid of finding a coward, the soul that seeks not
to better himself, but rather the nihilistic soul. I know that my soul tends
toward nihilism. Is that it then? It's a dangerous thing to think, but maybe I
am the product of an unsuccessful mutation in the gene pool.

That is actually something I think about a lot. Am I an unfit individual to
procreate? The question becomes, all of these other people, they are able to
find mates, and have sex with them, and in doing so, a lot of them spawn
children. I don't think a lot of people go through this sort of thing that I.
Rather, I am sure the people that I would associate with in my circle, I am
sure a lot of these sorts of people think through these sorts of things. But
outside of my circle, in the world, outside of the one percent, which I am most
definitely a part of, people don't go through this. I think to black people, to
hispanic people, the people who historically, and even still today, to some
extent, have been made slaves by our society, these people do not have this
notion. They have no notion of nihilism.

What is it then, about being oppressed, that incites in someone the will to
power?

This is counterintuitive to my upbringing, this is not something that I am
usually brought to think about. But those that are oppressed, and I mean
legitamattely oppressed, what is it about these people that allows them to
become attractive to a mate. Is it something in sharing the oppression? I know
so little about how people from Mexico, people born in Mexico, or Honduras, or
Guatamala, those people that are born there, and live there, and create a
family there, how those people, first, find someone to have a family with, and
then secondly, how these people, who find their way to the states, and become
slaves here, mexican slaves, in construction, or yard work, or roofing, or some
other decidedly slave like labor, how do these people become and remain
attractive to their mates?

Perhaps it is that propensity to work. The hard working man will have no
trouble finding a wife. But that is the thing, I have no idea how these people
find their wives. I have no clue how those in impoverished, poor, crime ridden
countries go about finding a wife.

I am being very racist here, and I am talking very much out of my realm of
knowledge.

What I am getting at though, is that these people are happy to become slaves,
they are happy to work doing menial and difficult physical labor for the
exchange of enough money and food stamps to buy whatever food we provide for
them. We tell them, "build up society so that it is good for us, and in
exchange, we will give you the bare minimum neccessary needed in order to
survive."

This is something that I feel like must exist. Not that it must exist, but that
it simply does. It is a great folly to think that this imbalance in structure
could be made right.

This is something that I think comes as something that I have no clue to
understand.

The other day, a few weeks ago, I came back from work, and my water was out. I
was at work, probably not actually doing any actual work, and certainly not
doing any physical labor, I was sitting in an air conditioned office, and
writting some code at my computer, but in all likelyhood, I was browsing
Reddit, writing out dreams, reading novels, and the like. I was not doing what
is even the bare minimum required for my job. And so I came back from this
state, and my water was out. It was just out. And I thought, "Fuck this
bullshit, I'm upset that the water is out." But I wasn't truely upset, I was
more just annoyed that I didn't know that the water was going to be out, and
now it was an inconienience on my life. I had made a shake, and went to clean
out the blender, and when I did, the water wouldn't come. When this happened, I
checked my email, and found that there was a leak that they were investigating,
and the people were working after hours trying to find this leak.

So I sat and patiently waited. I had some drinking water, and I was able to pee
just fine, but it was a great inconvienience to me.

And now that I am thinking on this (and I surely thought about it at the time
as well, but not in this sort of capacity) I think, such a structure, of me
sitting in an air conditioned office, while these people work labors so that I
might have water when the water system functions not to par, such a structure,
I don't want to do anything about it. I am okay with this structure. I am
brought about by my softness, and now that softness, I am dependent on it. And
overcoming this softness, that is what is most difficult for me.

So let's get to the business then. What is it that is the problem? I talked
with Jason, as I said around a week ago in my journal, and he acted almost like
a clinical psychologist to me, and I tried to make the conversation not like
that, but it was. But what we discovered, the truth is, in twenty years, I
would like to have a PHD. I want to go back to academia, I want to study
something for real, and I want to learn something really cool. Something
amazing. I want to research. I want to investigate the world, and I want to
discover something out of it. And the world, the world of computer science,
it is a fascinating world.

I think, the best thing to do would be to discover some way in which one could
unpack the meaning of the things that go on in a computer. To be able to talk
about, "what problems does a computer solve" and go from there.

I want physical textbooks. I need them in fact. I need to study. Having the
books online, that does not work. I want physical text books. Certain books, I
need them. I have two in mind right now, one being the nature of parsers, and
the other being the purpose of denotational semantics.

But something else, my drive to learn language, to parse novels, and discover
the hidden and intrinsic structure in them, this project has the most good to
me right now.

I want to dive back in to the functional world. I want to dive back in to
Haskell at some point. I got rather far, but not nearly far enough, with my
board game player. It was almost there, but then it wasn't there at all, and I
lost my interest in it. I was doing things in a way that didn't make sense. It
was incorrect.

I am being corrupted by the code base that is Alliant systems. There are better
ways to write programs, and being constantly exposed to the corruption that is
the way that their code is written is giving me an incorrect path on where I
need to go. I need to get out of there, sooner rather than later, and get on a
more correct path, with people who are smarter than me, who I can learn from. I
want to learn how to write proper code from true senior designers.

I do not want to end up like Luis. I love Luis, he is great, but I must say
that his notion of what quality code looks like I think is incorrect. I
remember him saying something like, everything he knows about code he learned
through working at Alliant. This is great, he is a great resource for knowing
particular things about the way Alliant runs things, but for coming under the
wing of a senior developer, he is wholly inadequete. Same thing with Chris,
especially Ross, and even Nick. These are not senior developers to look up to,
these are guys like me, who are just trying to get by.

So that is what I am missing. What is missing is, I don't have someone I
respect as a senior of mine. That is important. Respect is important, and
having respect for someone is what is missing. If I respected Nick, I would be
happy to do the work for him, but I don't. He is okay with whatever happens
with the code base. I don't respect the way things are done at Alliant. Lack of
respect is what is happening here.

I can tell. That is enlightening.

So what is the plan then?

Something else I am dreadfully missing, is a lack of someone to talk about
these things with. I can write in the journal like this, and speak them out to
myself, but I don't have actionable items afterward.

There are so many things I want to do with my time, but I end up becoming
mediocre at all of them. What is missing is, I lack respect for those around
me.

Alliant is very dishonest. Very dishonest. 
