# 20181024
So I want to get back to my journal today. I want to continue on with my
philosphical positions. I am not well read, but I think a lot, and I would
like, to some degree, whether my position is at all original, or whether it's
really just the claims of philosophers before me and reincarnated through my
understanding of the world, I want to get out what I see as some of the most
interesting questions that one can ask in the world, and that one can ask of
philosophy. So let's skip the ado and dive in, because fuck the ado.

There are two troubles of philosophy, as I see it, in using it as a way to
think about the world. The first is, the philosophical claims of one individual
can only be tested against the reaction to them by others who would
philosophize. That is, there is no meter stick with which to measure a
philosophical claim.

The second trouble, is that the definitions that a philosopher might use to
describe a certain concept could be somehow different than the definition
another philosopher would use to talk about a similar topic. One philospher
might say that something is true, while another would say that the same thing
is not true, but actually is a fact, and still another might say something that
the reality of the truth of a fact is unreal in the sense that facts cannot
make claims about truth. Of course, I am being coy, but the point remains, that
a sentence about the claims cannot be unpacked without a rubric with which to
unpack them, and as yet, while certain philosophers might lay out with great
clarity what they may mean by using certain terms, there is no universally
accepted notion of these terms and ideas that trancendes the individual
philosopher. Or rather, there might be, but that universally accepted notion
does not have an agreed upon nomenclature, and can lead to great confusion, at
least at the level of the philosophy student who has not yet worked out what
the nomenclature looks like.

So in talking about philosophy, where should I start? Should I simply start
making claims, with no meter stick to measure them and with no nomenclature to
ground my terms? How absurd that would be.

So how do we find these things? What is the meter stick that can be used to
measure a philosophical theory? What is the basis to concretely define a
philosophical concept? Can we start anywhere, or do we have to just pick a
place and create a path? Might we say "Let's not get bogged down in this notion
of beginning, and just define our beginning for the reader to accept for the
purpose of making discussion."

Indeed, this is what mathematics does. Mathematics does not ever make absolute
claims of truth, it only makes contextual claims of truth. Mathematics says,
"given some defintion of a concept, and given this claim, or set of claims,
that we call axioms, let us then go on to discover the nature in which this
structure behaves." So in a sense, mathematics is the most arbitrary of all
philosophical endevors. A young student of mathematics would ask, "but why do
we make these claims to be the bottom most of our understand? Why do we use
these atoms to create the building blocks of our structure? Is this not all
just arbitrary? Could we not make a different claim of an axiom, and come up
with a different mathematical theory, and could it all be just as valid?"

The foolish mathematician, the mathematical dogmatist, would respond and say,
"But these are the claims that mathematics begins on, they are the most
fundamental claims about the nature of our world. You cannot change them or
alter them. They are revealed to be the most indivisable truths. Accept them,
or perish at your own risk."

But this is folly. This mathematician is slave to the mathematicians before
him. This mathematician is slave to any other mathematician he may read. He
reads Euler and says, "This man is a prophet, by the miraculousness of his
divinity, he has revealed the irrefutable truth of mathematics. Behold, I will
place my head at this man's feet and worship him. I am subserviant to him."

And indeed, in this way dogmatist can acheive much. Is it wise for the common
man, the mediocre fool, to question the words of those who are much greater
than he? For this man, subserviance to the giant of his intellect is desirable
to the master of his foolishness. For him it is better to serve in heaven than
reign in hell.

But his subserviance blinds him. Still he says, "I would rather be blind and
follow than awake and lost. My blindness gives me the ground on which I stand,
and my subserviance gives me that which I cannot give myself."

But the wise student still keeps to his claim. He says, "These axioms are
indeed arbitrary, but they must have come from somewhere. Where is this
somewhere that they came?"

It is in their utility that they come. A problem needed to be solved, and so,
a mathematical framework was created to fit on top of the problem. And if the
problem fits the framework, the framework can solve the problem. Generations of
fitting frameworks to problems generated the axioms with which the framework is
predicated. It takes a giant of thought to say, "All of these problems can fit
into a class defined by these axioms, behold, I have discovered the axioms with
which we can reveal the world."

So enough of mathematics. The claims of mathematics always have a starting
point. The claim is, "Given these axioms, this theorem is true." So any problem
which fits into this model can be understood within this model, and the theorem
of the model will also apply to the problem which is mapped onto the model.

My point in all of this is, I do not want to make a claim that the starting
point I choose is in some way the only starting point. My starting point is the
one that seems the most fitting to me, but it could be the case that some other
starting point is more interesting than the one I choose. It's up to the reader
to judge if my thoughts are profound enough to warrent my own use of this
starting point, or if I would be better served to be subserviant to the giants
before me. But the thing is, if I were to enslave myself, I am not sure what
master to give my service to, so perhaps this is only the manner in which I
find my subserviance. But regardless of whether this is journey of freedom or a
journey of enslavement, in either case some starting point is neccessary. So
where I want to start is in defining the terms that I want to use.

What is the best manner to go about this? I could present a term, and then
present the definition of that term, and do this for all of the terms that I
want to use. This has the benefit of being succint, but has the danger, best I
can see, of being still ambiguous. It's also dreadfully boring, and I am of the
opinion that philosophy fails if the one partaking in the philosophy becomes
bored. So instead, I want to explore the concepts of being that we as humans
all share, and I want to label the concepts that we discover along the way with
terms that, hopefully, most closely resemble those concepts. I want to do it in
this way to remain as unambiguous as possible. I want to lead a journey that
goes through the realm of our existance, and when a certain idea or concept
comes up, an idea or concept which will be hopefully shared by those who might
go along with this journey, I want to label that concept, so that the label can
be used from then on to talk about that concept. In this way I hope to be less
ambiguous, and also I hope to be more interesting. Because what is the purpose
of philosophy if the philosopher does not provoke thought?  From this, we can
then go on to talk about the philosphical ideas, with little in the way of
confusion about what exactly is meant by the idea.

So what does this journey look like? What sort of journey to I wish to partake
in?

To answer that, let's ask a bit about the reason someone might come to
philosophy. For what reason might someone sit down and think about something?

The answer is usually this. There is something disconcordant with an
individuals understanding of some aspect of the world. Such a disconcordance
usually takes the form of a question. Usually the question is one of ethics, or
it is one of reality. A famous ethical question is the Trolley experiment, and
all of it's iterations. A famous question about reality is the question of the
existance of God.

Both of these sorts of questions are the things that people will turn to
philosophy for. But philosophy does not (or should not, in my opinion) seek to
provide answers to these questions, but instead, it should seek to provide a
means by which someone could think about these questions, and through this
line, come up with an answer for themself.

But these questions are not the starting point of our journey. Rather, this is
simply a bit of preamble for the journey we are to take. We keep these two
sorts of questions in mind as a justification for undertaking what is a rather
abstract and potentially meaningless journey through the human experience. The
promise of a means with which to start a mode of thought that could lead to a
greater understanding of these sorts of questions is the justification of what
is to come.

So the beginning to our journey, the beginning of any line of thought which
leads to a potential greater understanding of these sorts of questions, is to
start with this question. What do we know?

Now, at this point, we have already run into a problem. What is meant by "know"
and even still, what is meant by "we" or "I"? This is the issue of definitions
that I am quite honestly not truly able to get around. Already, at the starting
point of our journey, we have to define a term before we can experience that
term. But enough. Let's instead try and answer that question, and in this way
we can get to our starting point.

So many people would claim to know that the world is round. They would also
claim to know their name, what country they live in, and what year it is. These
are things that, when you ask a four year old if she knows how old she is, she
will hold up four fingers and say "I'm four" in a potentially adorable voice.
This is not the sort of knowledge I wish to talk. These are the sorts of things
that we know "beyond a reasonable doubt", to use law terminology. I instead ask
the question, what do we know, inculding the reasonable doubt?

I want to make the distinction about which way I am going here. A Chirstian in
his kitchen would know beyond a reasonable doubt that the pot he is holding is
made of cast iron. But he might say, "I know that Jesus Christ is my savior and
lord." But this is more of a claim of belief. The knowledge of the cast iron
pan is more concrete than the belief of Christ.

I wish to go the other way. I wish to say, "is there something that is greater
than your knowledge of the pan is made of cast iron? Is there something you
can say that you have knowledge of more than you have knowledge of the
existance of the pan in your hand?"

This seems like a trivial question. What is more real than the real thing in
your hand. But this is the point I am trying to get at.

Most reader will be familiar with the "Brain in a Vat" experiment. This thought
experiment says that, it's entirely possible that the world we experience is
not the real world, but is instead some sort of elaborate virtual simulation
that we take part in, that our existance is really that we are a brain in a
vat that is hooked up to some electrodes which feed input and receive output,
and that the world we are experiences is merely an artificial construction of
this virtual simulated world. When I place my hand on the table, I am not
feeling the table because there is an actual real world where there is a real
table, but instead, the simulated reality that is being fed to my brain is
manipulating my senses in such an exact way as to create a sensation of
resistance and the image of a table when I place my hand on it.

Most, when they hear about such an experiment say, "That's absurd, what a
crackpot idea that is." And to that I say, "I agree". But instead, I use this
experiment to make my point about "reasonable doubt." It could be said that,
beyond a reasonable doubt, we are not living in a simulated reality. But within
the reasonable doubt is the possiblity that we truly are brains living in vats
and that we are being fed lies about our perception.

This is the reason I want to be very careful about where I start. I want to go
on a journey, a journey of knowledge, but I want to be sure that we start that
journey of knowledge in a place that is inside the space where we can cast
reasonable doubts, if such a place exists. To this point, I have not made any
claim about such a place existing, but I want to rule out the possiblity of
such a place existing before I start with something that can be reasonably
doubted.

And at this point, there might be an objection. You might say, "I would like to
start in a place that can be reasonably doubted." Perhaps you even have some
place in mind. To this I then have to ask, why? If we can start in a place that
cannot be reasonably doubted, why would you suppose that we start in the place
that can be reasonably doubted? Are you afraid that starting in a different
place will invalidate your reasonable doubt?  Your resistance to this idea is
your own prejudice. Let us not have prejudice, as best we can being prejudiced
creatures that we are, and instead seek to find something that can somehow
resonate wholly with the human experience, so that when our arguments reduce to
absurdity, we can work back to the point where things became absurd. But if our
initial supposition can be reasonably doubted, it's possible that even our
starting point can be reduced to absurdity, and then we are just as lost as
when we started, having gained only the journey of folly. Let us rather find a
place beyond the reasonable doubt to start, and work with more and more doubt
as we come out from that point. Would we not rather find a place that could
somehow be universally fundamental to our thought?

So the question than becomes, "Is there such a thing as knowledge beyond a
reasonable doubt?" In other words, is it possible to ever truly know something?

Now, if the answer is no, then I would have taken you along this path for
nothing, and we would then have to find a new place to try and begin our
conversation. But on this journey, I think I do want to say that I think there
is one thing that it is possible to truly know. This thing is captured in this
statement.

"I have experience"

Now, I must clarify some things about this statement, because if I am making
the claim that this is somehow the most fundamental knowledge that a human can
have, we must both clarify and scrutinize the statement for flaws. We also must
know just exactly what is meant by this statement.

So I will start by saying what this claim is not making. And I want to say that
these negatives of the claim are not unreasonable. In fact, many are rather
reasonable things to say. However, reasonable though they may be, they are not
what the claim "I have experience" is trying to say.

This claim is not stating anything about the origin of where experience comes
from. The claim is not the statement that there is a real world, and
interaction with the real world provides this experience. It is not that.

This claim is also not making any claims about the nature of the experience. We
are not stating that there is such a thing as happy or sad, or that there is
such a thing as hot or cold. The sensation of hot or cold is part of the
experience, but we are not trying to describe the nature of the experience. We
are merely making a statement of it's existance.

We are also not making any sort of metaphysical claims. We are not saying that
the experience is a part of the soul, and that there is an otherworld that
provides the soul with it's experience. While that could be an explanation for
the form of existance, we are not making any claims about form in this claim.

We are also not making any claims about the validity of experience. That is to
say, things like hallucinations, premonitions, deja vu, religious experience,
and other things of that sort are all part of experience, along with the more
contemparary notion that "I put my hand on the hot stove and it felt hot", but
just because they all fall under experience does not speak to the validity of
the experience. I feel this point is a little tricky, because then it begs the
question, what does it mean to have a valid experience vs an invalid
experience? But that is my whole point. I am not making any sort of claim to
the validity of the experience, merely that the experience exists. Validity is
a different notion, one that is inside the reasonable doubt.
