# 20180702 Temptation of Marijuana, visit to my father, Commentary about the dragon and the king
So today I don't have much to say. I did have a dream last night, but it was
mostly uninteresting, since when I tried to go to sleep in one location, I had
my watch with the alarm for BJJ on it, but I could not go to sleep in that
location because I just couldn't, so I went into my bedroom but didn't take the
watch with me, so the dream was mostly about dreaming that it was a different
time than it was, and I actually woke up at 3 o'clock after my dream self had
convinced myself that it was past 7 o'clock. I knew as soon as I woke up that
it couldn't be 7, and I checked the time and it was indeed 3, so I did some
quick sleep math and determined I had two more sleep cycles, so I went back to
sleep and proceded to have a dream where I created an absurdly massive joint,
scraping off a bunch of weed (and dust) from a shelf onto a big sheet of
butcher paper, and the entire dream was so absurd that I didn't even smoke the
joint but just made it into two pieces and that was that. It was very strange,
and I honestly don't even know how to roll a joint so the entire thing was
quite absurd. I woke up knowing how absurd it was, so I am glad that at least I
didn't wake up thinking I had smoked some weed like I have in the past.

I will say I will be glad when this First Drug Offender Program gets started,
because at this point I still have temptations (not to the point of acting on
them, but to the point of amusing myself with them idly and subconciously as my
thought will drift) since I don't know when the first time I am going to have
to piss in a cup is, and it could very well be more than a month from now, at
which point I could smoke weed right now if it weren't for my own self enforced
probation. Obviously I am not going to, but I imagine that as long as my
thoughts are able to entertain the idea that I could do it and probably get
away with it, I will probably continue to have dreams like this, which is
unfortanate, but it is just how it is.

I visited my father on Sunday. He is doing a lot better than he was on
Thursday. His fever has gone down, his diarehha has gone down, and while he is
still certainly not anywhere close to recoverd from this thing, it seems like
the worst of it is over. The climax has been acheived and at this point it is
falling action. We didn't talk about much. I told him about our experince at
the Bavarian Grill, which he got a good kick out of, and we talked about other
things in between when the nurse was coming in and out and applying blood
transfusions. The most notable thing is, as I was approaching getting ready to
leave (and this is something that I will have to remember in the future, a sort
of trick for handling emotionally driven moments, to have them towards the end
of a conversation when arrangments require that one party leave at that
moment), he brought up our relationship, mentioning that as a child he was
always told to do things on his own, and he felt that he wanted to give us the
opposite, to do things for us, because he never anyone do anything for him.
Now, of course, I had thought about these things before, but never had I
thought about his reasoning for doing all of the things before, that it was
because he never had things done for him, and that he felt strongly that he
needed to provide that for us, and he mentioned the time he changed my spark
plugs without me there, and he said that he knew that it frosted me, and that
he didn't know it would frost me so. And he apologized for it, and as I was
driving away I thought about how I handled that moment. I could have handled it
a little better, but at the same time I didn't want to just say "I forgive you"
because that is too much like he is the only one at fault and I am applying my
forgivness as some hypocritical saint, so I said something like "well I have
known these things and thought about them, and though I knew them in my head I
was too bitter to be okay with them (or something equally unweildy) but I don't
fault you for it. You did a good job. You are doing a good job." and I was
speaking softly, so he didn't catch the last bit, and asked me to repeat it, so
I did. And then we shared our goodbyes I held his hand, which didn't have as
much strength as it has had before but still had some, and as I walked out I
said something like "I would tell you to keep getting better but I don't think
I have to tell you that" to which he replied that no indeed, I didn't have to
tell him that, and I made my leave. I don't recall if I said I love you (and
the fact that I can't recall that indicates to me that I didn't because I would
recall that if I did) and I remember thinking that I could have applied my
forgivness, or rather applied my past forgiveness again, to that situation a
little better, but still that I felt that it was a nice moment between us. Nice
moment indeed.

I also mentioned that lately, as this thing has been approaching it's climax, I
have felt a stronger inclination to visit, and that I'm not sure where it comes
from, but at the end there of our conversation I said that it eases my heart to
see him, and indeed it does ease my heart to see him, and I am glad that I said
that in that way. I thought about this, how it could be a selfish thing, and
again I go on about being selfish here, but I meant it in an entirely unselfish
way, and only just afterwards realized that it might be selfish, and so I can
say that it could in no way be meant as selfish. It is one of those things that
should only be said once though, I think for this very reason, because that
statement is in a since selfish, as if I am only visiting him to ease my own
heart, so I will not say it again, or at least I do not see myself seeing a
situation where it would be appropiate to say it again. Maybe such a situation
exists, but I can't forsee it so I think it is something that will be said once
and not again, at least not in relation to visiting him during this time.

I want to jump directly now to the short story that I have not brought myself
to finish yet. It is rather a peculiar thing, that I feel as though that I
should only write it when I feel so inspired, and that I shouldn't touch it
otherwise. Indeed, what would be the harm in writing for it, only to entirely
discard it and write it again when I feel so inspired? Would there be great
harm in writing a sub par draft of the ending of the story? I don't think so,
especially since I have a very sub par draft of the beginning of the story, and
a subpar draft of the ending would be only appropiate. I guess this comes to
the point of making my writing speak in volume rather than require there to be
consistent quality every time I sit to strike keys on the keyboard. Indeed, if
the concept of writing out some thousand words of a story that I am working on
become a routine ordeal, and the concept of constanly weeding through and
editing and finding structure in that which was written is one that I want to
make part of my writing, then I think for sure I should entirely dismiss this
idea of having my first draft be good, and instead simply sit down and write
for the story without concern for whether on not I will be satisfied with what
I write.

Still though, this particular story I have such a fondness for, as I
feel as though it is not my own story but instead entirely inspired by
something apart from me. Indeed, I don't know if I still have the original
recording, but I don't remember anything about the inspiration or motivation
for that original recording, and I have no idea where the idea came from. I can
only imagine being so high in my room, thinking about my nihilistic thoughts,
and coming up with this story to directly express them.

What I love about this story is that it has only three characters, the Dragon,
the King, and the People, each entirely different, each with different
motivations and motives and all of that, with different reasons for doing what
they do. In fact, this is the first story with characters that I have felt
don't neccesarrily fit into a mold like my other characters do (since I am very
much not a character person). The king is very much a part of me, but the
dragon and the people both represent ideas that are very much not a part of me.
Indeed, I don't empathize with the people, and I don't empathize with the
dragon. Instead, they are concepts, reflections, of what I think those
characters should be like.

At the point I am in the story right now I have just written up the ritual, and
I was interrupted (I had to go to yoga) at the point where the dragon was
summoned, and the people began to tell the dragon of their plight. I do not
believe I have written it yet, but I want the people to tell the dragon about
their problems, and for the dragon to insist on leading the people in the kings
place. I want this to be almost forced, I want there to be a sense of fear in
the people which is invoked, and I want the dragon to insist that this is the
way it must be. I have a line in my head "For what reason would you come all
the way to this pilgramage, to summon that which you have fear of and request
guidance from, if you are not to listen and obey when that has spoken?" I want
to liken this to some myth right now, but maybe I have been reading to much
epic poetry and should leave the references out of it.


