# 20180920
So last night I had a rather interesting dream.

The entire dream took place in a house which is in the area of where I used to
take piano lessons with Mr Stinson. I have had dreams here in the past. Like,
distant past.

Anyway, I remember, at the start of the dream, driving up to a house. It is a
somewhat large house, and the layout reminds me a bit of Brian Elies old house,
but different.

So I have been hesitant to begin this dream, I keep getting distracted. This
indicates to me that it has something deep in it.

So I'm honestly not entirely sure how this begins. I remember going in to the
house, which was the house Grandma lived in, and I remember visiting her. With
me I think were a few people, maybe Kyle and Mom, at the time, but I didn't
interact with them that much.

God I am getting distracted.

Okay, so I remember walking in, and going to the kitchen, and in the kitchen I
talked with Grandma some. I forget the conversation, or anything related to it.
In general I remember more talking with her just to appease her. She was
probably asking me questions about my personal life, and I was answering them
as nonchelantly as I could.

Eventually, we decide to leave. Or rather, we leave. I forget. I then remember,
as we left, we wanted to visit again. It was as if it were the next day or
something, like we had left and come back, but there was no break in the dream,
and instead we were just "coming back".

So this second time, we waited outside the house, and we were trying to figure
out if Grandma was there. And I remember saying to my dad on the phone, "I
think she may be dead" but I wasn't sure. Eventually, I think we did figure out
that she had died in between visits. So eventually we just let ourselves in.

Inside there, there was Jay, from Alliant, and he was sitting at the table. We
all walk up to him, me and mom and Kyle, with Jay there, and we start to talk.
It's Jay's birthday, and people are giving him presents. Kyle gives him his
present first, and it's a six pack of Shiner with another six pack of some
"Shiner Holiday edition" or something. And I thought, "Okay, good, I'm glad I
didn't get him a present because this is the present I would have gotten him,
and I would have repeated this present."

Then mom gave him his present, and it was the exact same thing, two six packs
of Shiner, and I thought, "Okay, now it really didn't matter that I didn't get
him anything."

As this was all going on, I just came to realize that I had drank three beers
as we were sitting there, and I freaked out a little bit. I thought, "Okay, I
just tested recently, (I tested last week) and lets pray that it will be a few
more days until I test again, I really hope that I don't have to test
tomorrow." I freaked out a little bit in the dream, but eventually just moved
on.

So after this, I do remember Jay asking me about my present, and I told him
that I didn't have one, and he just sort of said "oh" and that was that. There
also might have been mention of something about the work I am doing right now,
(irl I am about three weeks into working on this one case, and I fucking hate
it, and I am feeling insecure about how long it is taking me, and honestly, for
about a week in there, I did literally zero work on it.) So that theme came up
again.

At this point, we all went outside. The outdoors area went out, and to the
right was more house, but forward and left, it was in the background mostly
wooded area. In the foreground of this, though, was a sort of recess in the
ground, that had some water in it. It wasn't particularly like a hot tub,
altohugh we somewhat treated it like one. It was mostly just a square that was
cut off in the concrete.

Okay, I am getting wholly distracted, this is bad.

Anyway, we all go out to this cut out, and sit around it.

I think, at this point, it's just me, my mom, and Kyle.

I also have a feeling that the side closest to the house is raised up. So if
you imagine a square in the ground, but the ground, at one point, takes a step,
so that the step lines up with the east wall of the hole, and the water is
filled up to the lip of the other three walls, that is the situation of this
thing.

So I know my mom was sitting on the step, I was standing next to the step on
the north side, and Kyle was on the northwest corner.

At this point, I remember looking up at the stars, and looking in the distance
a bit, and mostly just admiring the views of these things.

I then remember my mom saying, "It's probably very cold, I wonder what it's
like to jump in." So she jumped in from the step. When she did, her shirt came
up, and revealed her breasts. She immediately became very cold staying under,
so she came up and kept just her legs in the water. I beleive she took off her
panties at that point as well.

This part is making me very uncomfortable to write down, because it seems as
though there is a strong sexual context here, and while there most definetely
is some, I did not see it that way. Rather, she was not doing these things with
any sort of sexuality in mind.

Also, I do want to say, that this woman was most like my mom in her features,
but her figure and such was something more like, "My idealized version of a
mate" or something like that, and it turns out that my mom overlaps that sort
of person in quite a few ways, so she is the one that comes out like that.

But in the dream, she is my mom, even though she is not exactly like my mom.
For instance, my mom would never just jump into cold water, that wouldn't
happen, and if she did, she would not handle the situation like this at all.
This woman is more, "My internallized version of the eternal mother" in a
sense.

So anyway, with that out of the way, my mom jumped into the water, her shirt
came up, but she got very cold all at once, and came back up to standing so
that her shirt came back down, but she took her panties off under the water.

At this point, I remember getting into the water, and going under. It was very
cold, as I thought, but I remember saying, "I know how to handle the cold"
because of the breathing, and so I withstood the cold. I went under, and swam
under for a bit.

There was a point, when I was swimming under the water, that I remember
thinking, "I could sneak a peek at my mom if I wanted to." but I instantly
thought that I didn't want to for the multitude of reasons, and instead I
simply glance over and saw that she indeed did not have her panties on, and
left it at that. She was shaved as well.

Perhaps this is why I was getting wholly distracted. It's really interesting to
me. Thinknig about the dream does not bring up any sort of feelings in me, but
actually writing out the dream makes me very uncomfortable. Like, very much so
to the point where I feel like I have to qualify eveyrthing that I say with
some sort of statement about exactly how it was. I think it's a consequence of
our human nature to cover ourselves with clothing that I don't like.

So I stayed under the water for a bit, and swam around. I came up, and I
remember coming out of the water, and looking around again, and everything was
nice. I then looked to Kyle, and asked him if he wanted to get in, and he said
that he was okay.

That was about the extent of the dream.

As I was writing out that dream, I remember I had another dream earlier in the
night, that had to do with the new BJJ location. I forget the exact details of
this dream, but bascially it had to do with the location being like a
gymnastics gym. It was like, there were lines on all of the aparatus, and I
remember getting on some rings, and some highbars, over the pits.

The whole thing about it being teh BJJ gym though, was Collin was the owner of
the gym, and he was making sure that everything was running smoothly. Hanna I
know was also part of this dream, but I don't know it what capacity.
