# 20180718 Dreams Naked at work, Rogan fights, Bath tub fuzzy animals, Dinner at vacation - Girl that giggles outside my apartment
So yesterday I had some dreams, but I don't want to dwell too long on them.
Everytime I say that, I end up writing the entire article about the dreams, but
this time I think I might mean it. I honestly am not feeling particularly
inspired to write right now anyway, but it is the early morning and it seems
like the right thing to do so I'm doing it.

So the first dream I think was the most psychologically significant, or at the
very least, it is the most obviously psychologically significant. This one had
to do with work. So I was at work, at my desk, and everything was pretty
surprisingly similar to the environment of my actual workplace where I sit now
at Alliant. As I was working, I was coming across an issue, something about
crystal reports not copying across from the desktop to handheld (which, by the
way, is an absurd thing, since the handheld doesn't use crystal reports at all,
but I digress). So in trying to figure out this problem, I end up talk with
Valerie a bit (she just hired on about a month ago at this point). So the
detail here that is relevent is, I was sitting naked at my desk, but I was
doing "on the down low". That is, this dream was not the "oh you're naked at
work dream," although it sort of turns into that, but it's the "I am
intentionally naked at my desk where I am usually secluded and no one will see,
because it's more comfartable to be naked and I like being naked". As I have
said before, and just a fact about myself that is relevent here, I will often
walk around and do things in my apartment naked, and sometimes if I am feeling
so bold I will go outside to my balcony naked (which there is something else
about that balcony I want to talk about after I get through these dreams). So I
am sitting at my desk naked, trying to figure out this problem, and Valerie
comes by my desk to help me. And I was just communicating with her about it
over the cube, and she was trying to tell me about this cool tool she uses to
migrate crystal reports from desktop to mobile, which I could use to streamline
the way I do things, but after some time like that, me being covered and all,
we got to the natural thing of "let me just come to your desk and show you."
And so she comes over to my desk, and I had one of those moments in the dream
where you go through all the stages of some psychological something all at
once. I had a very breif, so brief that it almost didn't exist, moment of
panic, as I knew the whole time I was naked, but that was quickly replaced by
the feeling of "no, that's okay, I am just naked at work." Like, I tried to
pretend that it wouldn't be a big deal, and the thing about things like that
is, they are not a big deal to me, but to some people, they are a big deal. So
I thought, "The only reason this would be a big deal is because other people
think it's a big deal, and they will surely make it a big deal if I make it a
big deal, so I will harness my inner 'this is not a big deal' so that they will
see that I don't consider it a big deal, and she will not make a thing of it
herself." It's a weird sort of feeling, the kind of feeling I have had in the
past, where you do something that shouldn't be a big deal but other people tend
to treat it as a big deal. So this is the state I was in as I was sitting
there, and she comes to walk over to my desk. So she walks over, and I am
sitting there naked, acting like it's not a big deal, and she, since she is my
dream self, mostly does the same, but as we are talking about the thing, the
whole topic of which I don't remember, she is just explaining how cool this
tool is and how neat it is to use, I remember she made direct eye contact with
my penis, which was sitting there between my legs like it does when I am naked,
but she kept talking. When I saw here do this, and it was dreadfully obvious, I
started to reposition myself so that my penis was not a prominently put out
there as my natural sitting position, I sat up a little more, and using gravity
I let it fall and tuck a bit between my legs. As I did this, she continue to
maintain eye contact with it, and watch as I did all of those things. It was
not until I made a comment in the conversation, that she removed her eye
contact. What I remember, my first thoughts through this whole extend eye
contact she had with my penis, was that I remember thinking "hm, she must like
it" which is a very base and immature thing to think, that she was looking at
my penis as if she liked it. We finished up our discussion, which ended pretty
soon after that, and we didn't talk about my nakedness or anything at all, she
just summed up what the tool did and how to use it, and she got up and went
back to her desk. After she did that, I started to reflect, still in the dream,
about the whole scenario. At first, in my reflection, I thought about my
initial instinct, that she "liked it" and that is why she looked at it for an
extended period of time even as I was trying to hide it, but then I thought,
"She is not like that, she is not that kind of girl, what if she was looking at
it more out of shock, and what if she will tell the managers about it, in
particular Leslie, who I know would treat this as sexual harrasment, and what
if I get fired over this whole encounter, this encounter which to me was
entirely harmless, and indeed I meant absolutely no mallicous or sexual intent
by my sitting there naked at my desk (and even the thought of "maybe she just
likes it and that's why she is looking" did not change the fact that when she
started looking I began cowering and working to hide myself from her), but even
so I would be punished for sexual infraction, and god knows how seriously
people treat those sorts of things." And I thought about that, how my sitting
there naked could be interpreted as sexual rather than just a natural state of
human beings, and I began to put clothes on, work clothes. So then, the dream
continued still, and it began to rain outside as Konkol, Valerie, and I all
stood outside the window near my desk, and we talked about the tool the three
of us together, still talking about just how cool it was, but I had clothes on
and I gained comfort in the fact that I had clothes on and we were all talking.
And outside, the storm grew quite quickly, and I saw fantastic lightning
hitting the lightning rods which were below us (which doesn't obey the physical
laws of nature, but again, dream world), and we commented on just how fantastic
it was.

At this point I woke up. I will say that I did have something of an erection,
although certainly not something that would be classified as a full on
erection, but what some might call a "chubby" is the word, and I had to pee, so
I got up, went to the bathroom, I took a pee, and I went to sleep.

The following dreams happened one after the other. The next one happened in a
full cycle of REM sleep, and the ones following that happened in twenty minute
REM cycles.

The next dream was about Joe Rogan fighting another man. This man was a very
brutish sort of man, the sort of brute that you would see in the movies who is
illiterate and only knows how to say "smash" and "me sad". The high points of
that dream are this. Joe knocks out the guy, and he falls down, but Rogan
doesn't want to continue punching. After looking at the ref in a "well, stop
the fight" kind of way, the ref tells him to "continue punching him" and Joe
goes intsead for an armbar submission. The guy starts to come to, stuggles out
of the Arm Bar, and Joe tells him "this is your out man, your in a submission,
just tap and it all ends," but the guy continues to struggle out, and gets out,
and almost catches Joe in a knee bar in a transition, but Joe easily comes out
of it, and secures a much deeper arm bar, at which point the fight is stopped.
Then, on the replay, everyone can see that Joe's hesitation in continuing to
punch the guy was well founded as the guy was very much out cold when joe hit
him with his punch, and everyone commented on Joe's mercy and compassion for
the guy by going for the sub instead of continuing to punch him in the face.
That was the key point, is even I as an observer in the dream, noticed the
first time that he was out, but on the replay, in slowmotion, we could see that
Joe saw what we couldn't and that he was really out cold.

So the other two dreams were interesting. The first was in a weird fairy land
place, like, grassy hills and a castle in the distance, and in this land there
was a cut out of a house, and in that cutout was a tub. It is really quite a
strange thing when you think about it, but it seemed natural to me because it
was a dream. So the only thing I remember about this dream, was my mom was
talking on the phone with someone about a donation that they wanted to make,
and she said "not to give it to Trump because that won't go to what he says it
will but instead it will go to his sheep" and I remember thinking, "Well that
makes sense, of course it would go to the sheep if you give it to Trump" in a
very non-sarcastic way, as if there were a whole field of sheep that were
"Trump's sheep" and he funneled his donation money into maintaining that field
of sheep. So I went into this cut out room, in this fairy world, where my mom
was talking on the phone, and in the tub there, I saw eight animals, four small
sheep, two bunnies, and two of the softest teddy bears ever, like so soft it's
almost disturbing. And I remember my mom inviting me to come in and pet them,
and that seemed pretty natural, but I remember being a bit apprensive as I got
in, and as they all started to cuddle with me, and in particular I remember the
teddy bears the most because they were disturbingly soft, and animate as well,
I remember thinking "Are they going to bite? Soft things like this I know can
bite" and my mom assured me that I was safe, and I tried my best to surrender
to the fluffiness and softness of the animals there, and I surrendered to it,
but I was still painfully uncomfortable by the sensation of softness that they
had, as if their fur were made out of some wooly blankety material.

I woke up from that dream with the idea that, those that put holes in the bases
of their teddies bears and masterbate with them are on the same level of
furries, and that I would imagine furries do what they do because they would
used to masterbate with their stuffed animals.

The last dream, and fuck any pretense of keeping this all short, had to do with
fake dream version of Disney World/generic dream vacation place. In there, I
saw my dad arrange a table for four, him, and my mom, and me and my brothers,
but I don't know which brother, I think just Kyle, because Evan wasn't there,
and in the dream I remember thinking, "just the four of us, that will be nice."
but then the table was extended to eight, being Granny and Papa and Chuck and
Michelle. That was the extent of that dream. It was very short, and might
symbolise something, but I don't want to dwell on it now, because I want to
talk about this girl that I saw yesterday.

So yesterday, as I was in my apartment, sitting on the chair which is next to
the door to my balcony, maybe reading or maybe just sitting there, I don't
remember, I looked out and saw a girl. I had seen this girl once before, but
regardless, she was sitting there, in that area outside my balcony, and I could
tell she was on the phone talking to someone. And as I started looking, I
started to evaluate her. I remember looking, and thinking, "stop looking or
she'll think you are a creeper." or something like that, but then I quoted the
line from American Beauty to myself, that I choose not to deny myself the
simple pleasures of this life we have. So I continued looking out, just looking
at her. She was very skinny, the sort of skinny that only girls of that kind
could pull of. She was skinny in a "I'm a vegan chick and I eat only salad and
chick food" kind of way. And she was sitting there, on the phone, and then she
laid back, all the way, that I could see just how dreadfully skinny she was,
not unhealthily so, but I began evalutaing her limbs, her arms and legs (I had
a profile view) and thinking about just how easy it would be to manipulate them
how I chose, in a Jiujitsu way, and I thought about too how difficult it would
be to head and arm choke her, and that Mato Leao would my choke of choice if I
had to. I continued to think about her, she was wearing tight jeans that were
stained as is the fashion for girls of that age and body type, and she was
wearing a flannel shirt, the sort that is also fashionable, and she was playing
with the base of it, which opened up at the base (I think it might have been
button up, I'm not sure) and as I was observing all of this, I thought about
how a different version of myself might have started masterbating, but I had no
inclination to masterbate, I was literally just genuinely curious about this
girl, and I wanted to know what compelled her to lay there and talk on the
phone.

The biggest thing that I think I want to write about here which struck me about
this whole thing was this. I thought about how much I enjoy doing things
outside without a shirt on. I will go outside wearing nothing but underwear and
athletic shorts, without a shirt, and I will work out, or just sit somewhere,
or go on a walk, or any of those things, and I thought about how much I like
doing that, and this girl, she couldn't do something like that, even if it were
something like walk in shorts and a sports bra, without being branded as a
slut. I know this to be true, and this is not some revelation of me, I
understand "slut shaming" and I also understand girls oppostion to the line
"well you shouldn't have been wearing that and walking there". I have always
understood that, but just now, observing this girl, I just thought, if she were
wearing something different, or even just had her flannel a little more
unbuttoned, or anything, I might have had the involuntary thought "oh, she is
clearly presenting herself, why else would she be dressed like that" and that
thought almost even intruded itself in me anyway.

Anyway, I thought about going to sit on my balcony, and for a while I resisted.
On the one hand I was decided that "It's my balcony, and I can sit on it
whenever I want" and on the other side I told myself, "The only reason you want
to sit on your balcony is because this girl is out there, and you are already
staring at her a little bit creepily." But then I reminded myself about the
line from American Beauty, and I also evaluted myself and my conscious, and I
was genuinely curious what her conversation was like, as if I could get some
insight on women by listening to this conversation of this one girl and seeing
what I could gleen from it.

So I gathered myself a glass of water, and I went outside, and I sat on the
chair on my balcony, and I sat there, and I looked out to the tree, I took in
the sounds, and I did my best to sit there with my water and not concern myself
with this girl. I sat there for maybe five minutes, and the most notable thing
I remember was this. This girls side of the conversation was composed of ninety
percent giggling, and the ten percent that wasn't giggling was incoherent
speech that led up to giggling. So much giggling. And not laughter. Giggling.

Giggling is the worst form of communication. It made me want to vomit. I heard
her giggling and thought nothing of disdain towards her. Any semblance of
thought that I thought I might be interested in this girl, as I looked at her
in my innocent creeper way and let uninnocent thoughts maybe enter my mind if
they would before I squashed them, they all went away. She was giggling, and
that giggling sounds disgusting to my ears.

What sort of human being giggles with another human being over the phone? What
kind of human will contribute nothing but giggles to a conversation, and
consider that proper speech? It's disdainful, it's unmusical, it's unnuanced,
it's grating to the ears, and it invokes a sort of immaturity in the receiver
that I never want to experience. I value my maturity, and this giggling, even
just listening to it, was almost an insult to it.

And the thing that makes me hate it so much is that I know it is manipulative.
This giggling, whether she realizes it or not, and I don't believe that women
realize anything, at least it seems not, she is being manipulative with her
giggling. She was probably talking to a boyfriend, if I had to guess, and
laying down, looking at the sky, and shiffting her legs back and forth, sitting
in various positions, and giggling as she talked with this person. As she
giggled with the person. I know what that giggling prompts in me, it is a
feeling of "I must perpetuate this giggling with continued immaturity". Indeed,
if I say something that prompts a giggle, that is an indicator to me that I
have said something that I didn't want to say. If someone giggles with me, that
means I am saying the most disengenuous thing, and if the giggle is legitmate,
and I continue to perpetuate it, that means I am being wholly disengenuous to
everything that I believe.

But still, I sat there, and I drank my water, and I listened to the sounds, to
the birds, and the locusts, and the air conditioner. All of it whirred in that
sort of city white noise that you always here, and to add to that noise, was
this girl, talking on the phone, giggling to the recipient, and life was good.
I did not have to concern myself with the birds, they can chirp and I will
watch them chirp. I actually did so the day before, although I did not write
about it, but I watched a bird chirp like mad, and even when another bird came
up to it it just sat there on the branch chirping, like a broken siren or a
faulty alarm, just sitting and chirping with seemingly no purpose in mind,
before I grew disgusted at this bird and walked on. I was curious if there was
an object to it's chirping, or if it would stop chirping at some point, but it
literally just stood, and chirped, in different directions, pivoting on its
feet on the branch, bellowing it's tiny little body with each chirp, and that's
all it did. So my disgust won over my curiosity, and I walked on, never to
concern myself with this bird again. That is how I feel with this woman. Some
past version of myself might have looked on her and seen her and wanted to see
if I could find some memory material I could masterbate to. I would have played
out a fantasy where we met eyes, and she came up to my room, and we would have
sex, that would have been a fantasy that I might have played out in a past
life. Why, I remember when I was in Seattle, and I wanted to masterbate
(because finding the privacy to masterbate was difficult living in my car like
I was) so I stood behind a sort of wall that acted as a brick balcony to an
abandoned building there, outside one of the parks, and across the way, a good
ways from me so that she would not bother to look over to me, I saw a woman on
a jog. She was jogging, I forget what she was wearing, but probably some sort
of cute athletic clothing, the sort of athletic clothing that you see and you
say "Is that athletic clothing or is that a new designer fashion", some sort of
tight form fitting pants and a sports bra and some stylish top to go with it,
and when I saw her jogging by, I was instantly invigorated in my pursuit of
masterbation, and I used that scene to imagine that perhaps she saw me, and in
the middle of her jog she would come over and help out. I have always known the
absurdity of such fantasies, but they have always gotten me off, and made my
orgasms more intense, so I suspend my disbelief and indulge in them anyway. And
this girl, that Brett that suspends his disbelief, would have come up with some
sort of fantasy for this girl, but not so. Indeed, not only the fact that I
have made an active effort to try and abolish those sorts of fantasies from my
thought, and it is slowly making progress, besides that, the sound of her
giggling in the phone, and the extreme disgust I felt at hearing that, disgust
that borders almost on hatred, in the same way I felt disgust for that bird
that chirped to no end that I could see, I observed that disgust, but I knew,
that this girl was not one that I wanted to be in any part of my life, not in
reality and not even in my fantasy. That fantasy I no longer indulge in, not
only becasue I am not masterbating anymore, but because the fantasy wouldn't
work anymore. I would say "No, you reprehinsible whore, stop giggling and get
out of my life, I don't want you in that way. I have nothing aganist you as a
person, and I am totally content with you living out your life and giggling
with whoever you want, but I do not want that in my life, and I reject you on
the premise that you are an infernally immature human, and I seek to live in a
way to promote my own maturity, so you can giggle, but you will get no positive
reenforcment from me about it. So be on your way."

So many strong thoughts in one simple encounter. And this is the thing. I have
never considered myself a pervert or a creeper, but everything I have talked
about, especially when I play out these fantasys during masterbation, I think
that they do characterize me as a creeper. I hate that word though. That is
something I guess I would like to talk about some other time. I certainly to
not enjoy "creeping" in that sense, but I do think I have a tendency towards
that, in my basest nature, in the same way that I have had fantasies of rape in
my basest nature. I never act on them, and I don't act on my creeper
tendencies, but it might reveal something about my relationship with women that
I have not really examined before.

But for now I have to go. Getting out of myself will be good, I am going to BJJ
now to trian. I will be back, but probably not to write more about this. This
is probably the end of the journal for today, so I will leave it at that.


