# 20180831
So yesterday I had some dreams, and they were interesting dreams, because I did
not find them very significant, and I have an inclination to dismiss them, but
I think that they are very significant because of this inclination.

However, I must say that I entirely forget exactly how the dreams go. I
remember some of the fragments, but I remember this dream having maybe five
parts, and I only remember bits and pieces about it. That is, I only remember
fragments of it, but the whole cohesive dream, which this one I believe more or
less was, I do not remember at all.

So without further ado, let me just try and dive right in to what I remember
about the dream.

So let's start at what I remember being the first part of the dream. I
remember, this part of the dream was at a crossfit event, something like the
crossfit games, although it wasn't the games itself, but perhaps maybe
regionals or something like that. Or, it could have just been an event that was
independent of the games. I'm not sure. But the scene was this.

There was essentially a big indoor track. The track could have very easily been
400m, although it might have been longer. Thinking about it in the dream, I
think the track probably was a true 400m track. And it was indoors, so the
inside of the track was the inside wall, and in this inside wall, I am not sure
what was there. It could be the theater that I have been to in other dreams,
now that I think about it, but it could be something totally different. It did
not come up in the dream.

Anyway, on the outside of the track there were stands, where people would
watch, spectators. And I remember, there was a whole crowd of atheltes, and
they were taking the mark for the start of the event. And this was the womens
youth division. And by youth, I mean, something like 16-19. And these
atheletes, they were taking their mark, and this was the beginning of the
event.

So I remember the gun fired, and the atheletes took off. The began the race.

I'm not sure how long the entire race was, although if I had to guess, I would
say it's a 10k. And the way the race worked was this. The atheletes would start
along the track, but at the point where the track bent, instead of going
around, where the 100m lane goes forward, it continued forward to a wide
openening in the stadium, and it went outside. Once outside, there were cones
and such set up to guide the atheletes into another track, but this track was
more like a tunnel. It was a long tunnel, similar to an airport tunnel, like
the airways at Denver airport, and it had some turns, but it was to be implied
that they would run the entire thing through this tunnel. The ceilings of the
stadium were maybe 10 meters high, and the ceilings of this tunnel were
probably 6 meters high. In the tunnel area, there were side tunnels and other
things that went out, but it was rather clear which way was the proper straight
way that the atheletes were to go for the race.

So the atheletes started, and the first thing I remmeber thinking as they went
off, was I looked into the stands, and I saw very few people there. And I said
to myself, I suppose this makes sense, once they go off, there is not much to
spectate any more.

But I started to move along the track, and further down, I started to see
crowds of full stands along the way. In the stadium, further down, the stands
were full. And then, as the atheletes went outside and continued on their jog
at this point, there were crowds of people around the cones there on each side,
observing as you would imagine.

So I followed along this route, and as I started, I noticed that the atheletes
were getting more and more sparse, which makes sense, as you go along the race,
the atheletes get spread out as they all have different speeds at which they
go.

So as I made it into the long tunnel, and both the runners and the crowd were
getting more sparse, I remember going in to the tunnel. In the tunnel, there
were atheletes going, and I remember the scene, the tunnel went on for maybe
400 meters, and there was a side hallway to the left, but the main pathway
curved off to the right at this point, to continue on with the race.

So in this part of the tunnel, I remember jogging along with the women, and I
went and as I went my pace was about that which I usually jog, between a 9 and
a 10 minute pace, and as I jogged, I noticed that these girls were passing me
rather quickly. It wasn't even like I almost was going their pace, they were
passing. So I matched the speed of one of the girls, and determined that they
were going at about a 7 minute pace. So I thought, that's acheivable, I should
be able to do this as well.

Then, someone else was there, Griffin Miller. I have only met this guy once
really, or maybe a couple of times, but he was there, and he said to me
something like, "These girls, they are better than us, you shouldn't expect to
be able to keep up with them," and I remember being confused, and I said, "I
don't think so, I think that with training, a goal like this is totally
acheivable." He more or less just sort of shrugged it off, certainly not
agreeing with me but also not arguing further, and that was that.

I remember, I stayed watching this scene, of the girls going by, for a little
bit longer, but eventually I went out.

At this point, I'm not sure if this is a seperate dream, or if these dreams ar
connected. And my memory of this part of the dream is fragmented, I know there
are details, of people that were there, and of what exactly happened, that I am
not remembering. But I will do my best to show it as it happened.

So in this part of the dream I am driving.

In fact, I have memories of some of the very hilly brick roads of Seattle at
this point.

But I remember driving, and I will try and describe the scene as best I can.

I was driving sideways along a hill. The road itself was flat, but it was on a
hill, so that to my left was down the hill and to my right were houses that
were embedded in the hill, going up. Towards the bottom of the hill, as you
went past all of the grass and foliage and other undrivable things, there was a
highway, parallel to the road I was on. This highway would very easily be 95.
So I think this scene is associated with that.

Anyway, as I was driving along, this road I was on was a one way road, and at
a certain point, it broke off into a pitfall, that is, the road simply stopped,
and it went from being a road on the hill to the foliage and grass of the hill.

There was another road further down, that I could turn on to. This road went to
the left, and way down, very steeply, and then it turned back to the right. So
I drove down on this road at this point, and made it to the end of this road,
and at the point where I wanted to go back up, there was something almost like
a step going back up. So there was the lower road, then there was a large slab,
like a step, to the right, where this road deadended, and which acted as a
midway point to the original road, which coninued on from there.

So I drove down to this second road, and went along it for a bit, until it dead
ended, and I was able to get my car up on to this step, because the step from
this bottom road to the slab was not very tall, but the gap between the slab
and the original road was large.

At this point, I know there was somebody else there, and my dream work is
censoring who it would be. I think they were on top of the original road, and
they were telling me to just get back up. They were beckoning.

Now I will do my best to create an association here, because something tells me
that this is very important. In fact, I might still be denying who it was.

So the first association I have is that it is like my mom, although I know this
association to be incorrect, at least, there might be an association, but this
woman at the top of the slab was not my mom.

Oh, it was certainly a woman, that much is certain.

I then have Sarah, my cousin that I have met infrequently in life, as the woman
on top here. This is a closer association. And it makes somewhat more sense as
far as everything goes.

Some details about this woman though. She was wearing a white shirt that had
some sort of print on it. It was either the print of a band, or of some scene,
like a group of four boys in a boy band or something like that. The girl, she
was relatively young, in her early twenties say. And I believe she was blonde.

In fact, I very much think this girl is a representation of my desire to have a
girl bring me back to my original path. This must be the interpretation of my
dreams. Sarah I have many associations as a girl that is looking for a mate in
her life, and I have at times found her attractive, on the occasions that we
have met her. And of course my mother fits there as well, as the woman who
would bring me back to the original path, in a very oedipul way. So this girl,
she is a version of my ideal woman here.

Something I also remember is that there were two little boys there. Two little
boys from africa, they were black, and tehy were under the care of this girl.
They were not her children, as in, she did not give birth to them, but she was
caring for them. I do not know what these two boys represent, but I don't feel
like making more associations now, and I want to resume with the dream.

So after enough beckoning, and going back and forth, I was of the opinion that
I could not cross this gap in my car, and that it wasn't possible for me to get
up onto the path. I wanted to, it wasn't that, it was just, I thought it was
foolish to try and drive my car across such a gap, it wouldn't work. But the
girl simply kept beckoning me, saying, "Yes, you can do it, come on, you know
how to do this," and so on. So eventually, I nervously angled myself to make
the gap, and I do remember driving up to the original road, with much
bumpiness, and a little bit of fear of falling. But I made it.

At this, the girl said, "See, of course you could make it." I sort of said,
"Yeah," and I am not sure if I thanked her or not.

I honestly don't remember how we broke at this point. I think, I kept driving
on, and she went her own way. I was on my way to this house, which becomes the
next part of the dream.

So I continued along this original road for a little bit, but not very long at
all, I quickly turned to the right, up the hill, along a road there, and then
to the left again, and parked in front of a house that was sort of tucked away
there, which was the house that was my destination the whole time.

The house was rather small. It was the sort of house that you buy for the
location rather than for the quality of teh house. So the house was small, and
I walked up teh steps to the front door, and walking in to the front door,
there was a living room area, and it was rather crowded with people that I
didn't know. The living room was shaped such that, you walked in, and there was
a wall to you right, and directly in front there was a couch, facing away,
towards a TV, and then another couch perpendicular to it, facing the right, on
the left side of this couch. You could then walk (and in the dream, there were
people conversing and such in this walkway) to the left, behind the couch, and
to the right, there was a hallway that went into some of the back rooms, and
behind this perpendicular couch, there was a counter space, which served to
seperate the kitchen area from the living area. But the kitchen area was rather
strange, because as you went to the other side of this kitchen area, on the
right side, towards the counter side, there was a sink, which you would expect,
but on the left side, it was wholly occupied by a washer and dryer. If you were
to continue along this walkway, you would go towards a sort of side door, that
led outside.

So I walked into the front door, and this house was quite crowded. It was a
small house in the first place, and it was filled with quite a few people, most
of whom I did not recognize.

I turned to my left, and walked along this walkway, weaving between people who
were drinking and conversing and having a good time, and I made my way to this
kitchen area. I then remeber, Jaclyn was there, my mothers cousin Jaclyn, and I
asked her if I could use the washer and dryer. She said sure, and I said I was
relieved, because my Vibram's really needed washing, and the washer would do it
a lot of good.

So I put my vibram's in the wash, and strated the washer. The washer started,
and I think Jaclyn and I talked a little bit. I think we just talked about how
the vibrams are machine washable, and how nice that is, but that I hadn't
washed them in a while. Very mundane conversation.

As the washer started going, it started making a "Ka thunk, Ka Thunk, Ka Thunk"
noise, similar to the noise that my washer makes. I don't think this was
precipitated by anything that was happening irl, but I could be wrong. My
washer was not going last night, so I'm not sure what else might have caused
it. But as this was happenning, I remember, an old man, probably in his 60s,
got up, and glared at me as if he was upset, and walked to the back area and
turned right into a room there.

I remember asking Jaclyn what that was all about, and she said that "He doesn't
like it when teh washer makes noise." I rememebr asking if I should follow him
and apolgize, but explain to him that my vibram's really needed cleaning, and
that it was impossible to avoid it, but she said no, that probably wasn't a
good idea. So we just stayed there.

I think that was the end of the dream, now that I think about it. I feel ilike
something more happened, like, I ended up going to the back room, and maybe I
did, but I woke up as I was walking back there. So I'm not sure.

Something sort of funny to note, I have not worn my vibrams IRL in maybe a week
while because, well, they have started to develop a smell, and I haven't taken
the time to wash them. It is something, washing them, that I have not
consciously thought needs to happen, but subconsciously, clearly I do. What I
mean is, I have not had the thought, "I should wash them" but then I don't do
it, but if someone were to ask me if they needed to be washed, I would say,
"Yeah, I suppose they do." I find this very interesting, and it supports the
idea that the dream is the manner by which the subconscious will communicate
with the conscious.

It's time for open mat, I somehow wrote all of this in under an hour, and I
didn't think it would happen. But I am off now. I will probably not return to
the journal, but I might return to my story of the hermit. We will see.
