# 20180824
So last time I journled here, I much avoided the topic of my court appearence,
not so much consciously, but I remember thinking, "I could talk about that, but
instead I want to talk about something else, so I will do that." Well, today, I
do not have something else that I want to talk about, so I now default to
talking about the court appearance that I was required to make two days ago on
Wednesday. It is now Friday.

So I want to begin by saying that a few days past, I received an email from my
lawyer, reminding me of my court appearance. This email, I received on Monday,
and he reminded me to pee in the cup at teh probation office on Tuesday, and
then to arrive at 12:15 for my court appearance at 1:00. I remember thinking at
that point, "Last time he told me about the court appearence, he told me to
arrive at 12:30, and now he is telling me 12:15, he must have a poor impression
of my ability to arrive at things on time."

Anyway, Wednesday morning comes around, and I have a difficult time waking up,
as I have been for the past week or so, and I wish to just lie there in bed.
Eventually, I do wake up, and I get dressed, and I gather some dress clothes
(slacks, a button shirt, socks, and shoes) and leave those in my car. I elected
to dress as I normally do, so as to avoid those at work asking questions. "Why
are you so dressed? For what purpose do you dress more fancy today than every
other day of every other week for the past eight months." I wanted to avoid
these questions.

So I left my dress clothes in my car. Come 11:45, I elect to lock my machine,
and make my way to the court. So I walk down the stairs, then up the stairs of
the parking garage, to the fourth floor in the back corner where I always park,
and I started to take out the dress clothes which I had left hanging in the
car. With the protection of my car there, I then take my time arranging
everything just so on the hood of my car. I spent the next probably three to
five minutes taking off the clothes I was wearing, down to my underwear, and
folding them neatly on my passenger side chair, and casually, with precision
and care, dressing myself in the dressier clothes. I buttoned all the buttons
with care, and I pulled my socks up my calves, and tied my shoes with care, and
in general, I was being sure to take care in dressing myself to make myself
presentable to the judge.

Having dressed myself like so, and placed my neatly folded clothes in the
passenger side chair, and placed my belongings in my new pockets, I realized
that I forgot a dress belt. No big concern, I merely cursed myself a touch, but
not too harshly, because I knew I was forgeting something when I took out the
clothes that morning, but wasn't sure what it was, and here I was to discover
that it was a belt. I was able to use my less formal belt, and it fit just well
with the Khaki's, but this belt is a little ratted and worn. I am quite fond of
the belt, just for the reason that it is ratted and worn, but such a thing is
not appropiate for formal wear. No matter, I told myself, it's okay.

So when I got in my car, and started the engine, and made my way from the
fourth floor of the parking lot, to the third floor of the parking lot, in a
flash I suddenly remembered that I had left my notes on my desk. Three floors
down, and then five floors up, were sitting, in a leather black notebook, all
of the paperwork that I knew would be neccessary for the court appearence. I
had wholly forgotten to grab them when I came down.

Now here I was in this conundrum. I had taken such care to make sure that those
at work would not see me in this formal wear. I did not want to rouse any
questions about what I was doing, lest I god forbid require that I tell the
truth to those, or worse fabricate a lie. So here I was, on the third floor,
dressed in the formal wear, which took me maybe five minutes to dress myself
into, and now I have to go back up to my desk and gather my paperwork.

At this point, I knew I had to make a decision and fast. I parked on the corner
of the third floor, and decided that I would return to my regular wear, redress
myself in my usual work clothes, and make my way as fast as I could back up to
my desk, grab the notes, and return back to my car where I would redress in my
formal wear, and be on my way.

I looked at the clock, and determined that I did have enough time to do all of
this. I then thought, "thankfully my lawyer requested I be there forty five
minutes early, he must have this sort of thing happen all the time." So I
hastily unbutton all of my buttons, undid all of the clasp, and quickly put on
my jeans and shirt, and I threw all of the formal clothes in the car, and put
on my regular shoes, and ran at moderate pace across the lot, into the
building, up the stairs, and to my desk.

When I got to my desk, my paperwork was all there ready to go. I grabbed it all
hastily, taking care not to breathe too loudly and taking care not to bring
much attention to myself at all. I grabbed up the paperwork, sprinted as fast
as I could back down the stairs, and then back up the stairs, and then came
back to my car, where my hastily thrown in clothes were strewn in the car.

I gathered the clothes again, and this time I put them on and buttoned them as
quickly as I could. I actually thought, as I was running to the car, I made an
inventory of all the actions that needed to be done, and thought about the most
efficient way to complete all of them, to redress myself in the clothes that I
had there. So this time, I buttoned everything, zipped everything, clasped
everything, threw my work clothes just wheerever they may land into the car,
and made my way into the car again.

I took off now, and did a quick evaluation. I knew the court was around 30
minutes away, and I looked at the clock and it read 12:15, so I had plenty of
time to make it there on time, but my lawyer wanted me there at 12:15, and I
knew that I would be 30 minutes late. So as I was driving out to the highway, I
grabbed my phone, and made the call to my lawyer. Well, I got my lawyers
office, and I got an answering machine, so that would not do. I know I have
received a call from his main line, and I knew I had access to it, but I wasn't
going to start shuffling through the paperwork while I was driving, and I
wasn't going to try and find that and type it in to the phone, going seventy
eight mph down the highway. So I decided I would leave my phone where I could
see it, and if he called, because I knew he would call, I would calmly explain
to him everything that happened, at least the part that was relevent, that I
forgot my paperwork and was delayed about twenty minutes in getting it, and
leave it at that.

So I started driving, and after going from 114 to bush, I was about 8 miles in
to the 32 mile trip, and I felt that I had not calmed down. Multiple times, I
tried to reassure myself that I was okay, that everything was okay, I had the
paperwork, and I was dressed, and I was on my way to the court and that
everything is going to turn out all right. I told myself that many times. But I
still felt myself physically stressed. Mentally I knew that everything was okay
and I was on the right path, but my body was still exhibiting fight or flight
reflexes. I felt my heart rate and knew that it was much higher than normal,
and I felt that my pulse was also a lot stronger than normal. I was honestly
more annoyed at the response than anything else.

So as I merged from Bush to 35, and got on the highway that takes up the
majority of the trip from work to the court, I started to practice the Wim Hof
breathing method in the car. Now, I know that it's frowned upon to practice the
breathing exercises when driving, and everyone warns against it, but quite
honestly, I do it all the time, and at this moment, I knew that it would help
tremendously in calming my body which in turn would calm my mind.

So as I merged on to the express lane, I began taking the power breathes. You
take a deep inhale, from the belly, then you just let it go, then deep inhale,
then let go, and you do this for 36 times is the number that works best for me.
And then, on the last one, I take the deepest breathe I can, an I hold it in
for five or so seconds, enough to let that last breathe really sink in, and
then I let it go. And when you let this one go, you let it go, and you stay
there. You stay, letting it go, and you hold it.

As I drove there, breathe held at the bottom here, everything felt okay. I was
better. I started to draw my attention to my seated position, I sat more
properly in my chair, and straigtened my spine, and opened my chest, I let
everything come back in line. All the thoughts of court, and law, which weren't
really in my head in the first place except by association of the cortisol in
my system, it all dissolved away. I checked my phone, to make sure I wasn't
receive a call from my lawyer, and I remembered that I would have to check it
regularly. I checked my speed, and looked at the clock, and knew that
everything was in place to get to the court with plenty of time to spare. And I
could relax.

So I continued with the WHM of breathing, and on the second round, I started to
raise my windows. I don't know why, but I just decided that I wanted the
windows further up. And as I was raising them, I looked to my phone, and saw
that my lawyer was calling, and so I thought, "perfect," and raised the windows
all teh way to reduce the noise, and I picked up the phone. I let out the
breathe I was holding and calmly explained what had happened, and that my
estimated time of arrival was 12:45, and that I'm very sorry that I was running
late, but that everything will be okay. He then said okay, and we concluded
with agreeing to meet eachother in a little bit, and I put the phone away,
rolled the windows back down, and continued driving.

I proceeded to do a third round of breathing, and shortly thereafter, I exited
the highway and parked in the lot of the court.

Upon arriving, I was afraid I might not know exactly which building was the
court, and I was concerned that I might arrive at teh wrong room or something
and spend quite a bit of time searching for exactly where I needed to be.
However, upon arriving at the court, it was rather clear that this building was
exactly the building where this sort of thing happens. It was rather imposing,
a tall structure with a large parking lot, and in the front of it was a sort of
green way, with benches and things, outside the folding doors, and emblazened
both on the sign that led up to it, and on the court itself, were the words
indicating "This is the Denton county court." I forget exactly what the words
were, but I remember thinking, "Wow, do they really need all of that" it was
something like "Denton County Judicial Court of the County" or something,
arranged in a circle and probably with some logo of an eagle holding an arrow
or something else symbolic of the court in the center. So I knew that this was
the place.

I parked, and made my way inside. Upon going through the metal detectors, I
then asked one of the officers there what the best way to the third floor is,
and he told me "upward," with a snicker and a grin. A younger and more immature
me would have laied in to him, I absolutely despise this sort of humor, perhaps
more than I despise puns, but I simply rephrased my question. "Which way are
the elevators?" An older gentelman cop then pointed me in the direction of the
elevators, and I made eye contact with this man, and said, "Thank you." If I
glared at the first man, I don't remember it, I am pretty certain I just made
my way to the elevator. And I remember thinking as I walked there, "There must
be some correlation to the kind of person that answers a genuine question with
such a douchy answer and the kind of person that wants to become a cop. There
must be some sort of correlation there." However, this article is not the time
to talk about my opinions on the personalities of those that wish to go into
law enforcement, such a topic is for another day and another time.

I made my way to the elevator, and got in with two other ladies, both going to
the fourth floor. I remember they talked with one another, and one was
mentioning how she has been late to the court for some days now, but the judge
hasn't minded and it's been okay. The only reason I mentions this is because it
brought be back to reality. "Even those in court have issues with being on time
to work all the time." It's really interesting, I always used to think of "the
law" as a child as something that was innate in the world, that it was somehow
above the people of the world. This notion came from my mother, who very much
regards the law as something that should never be disobeyed for any reason, and
she imposed that idea on me as a child, but now that I have grown and I am now
allowed to speak for myself and have my own opinions without the constant
opposition to my own thought by my parents, I have come to see the law as
simply another product of the shared experiences of us as human beings. And
this conversation just brought me into that mode of thought for a moment, and I
thought, "The court is no different than a software firm, the employees are
sometimes late, and they make revenue from their clients, albiet in a less
direct way, but still, it's simply another machine in our pile of machines that
we call society." Still, this didn't change the fact that I was later than I
should have been, and that I needed to make it to my court appearence.

At this point I could keeping going on in this way, mentioning every detail and
talking about all of my points, but for the most part, from here, as soon as I
met my lawyer, there isn't much to talk about. I walked into the court, (I had
to check which court it was, and I think it was #387, I could check again, but
whatever) and I looked around and made eye contact with who I am pretty certain
was my lawyer (I knew what he looked like, but there was some distance between
us, and he was in a suit which I had never seen him in before.) He then
mentioned that I should go back to the hallway and wait for him. After about
five excruciating minutes, excruciating because I'm pretty sure that was him,
but more because, every time the door opened and someone came to the hallway I
thought it might be him, and when it wasn't I began to second guess myself, he
eventually came out. I apologized again for being late, and he shrugged it off,
and we went to one of the benches in the open way there and went through
paperwork.

I probably signed twenty or so documents, details various things about my
guilt, about my right to waive a trial, about so many things that I have no
clue about. I honstly didn't give a shit. My lawyer was explaining every
document to me, and what it meant, and I remember thinking, "okay, this is
great, I'm glad you are explaining all of this shit to me, but for real though,
I just want to sign all of this so we can get in the court in time." But my
lawyer seemed unconcerned about the whole thing, so I reasoned that I would
just let him do his thing.

After signing all the paper work, I sat at the pew in the court, and waited, at
the instructions of my lawyer. It reminded me of church, and I thought, "how
strange it is that a court and a church would have such similar layouts, there
must be significance to this." There were many similarities, now that I think
about it. The biggest thing is that the court was missing candles and stained
glass windows. Besides that, the arrangements, the tables, the seperators,
everything reminded me of a church. In fact, there is even an analogy to the
juror bench (which was empty for this hearing) and the choir stand. If you
would have told me "This room is for a small church of forty members" then I
would have marked the Jury bench as the choir stalls, and the judges platform
for the pulpit.

After some time, the judge came in, and took his seat, from a different room
than everyone else. I remember thinking when he came in, "hm, that makes sense
that he would come in a different way than everyone else, but I wonder how one
gets into that room? Does he come through the front door of the court like
everyone else, or is tehre a back way that he comes in? And I wonder if he
changes into his pajamas while he is here. In fact, he probably changes into
his pajamas in the same way the pastor changes into his, which is in the back
room that leads into the way the pastor enters the church. The analogies are
quite remarkable.

So he entered, and it was quite some time before silence was called and he
started speaking. I don't want to go into his speech too much, and I certainly
don't want to recreate it. It certainly wasn't anything worth recreating, he
mostly just talked about the drug problem, and how he wants to determine what
the best course of treatment for those with a drug problem are. And I thought,
"If you really want to determine the best course of treatment, then why are you
in that position and not helping at a rehab facility or something." But getting
the feel for this guys personality, from this meeting, and from my lawyer, it
seems as though being in the position of judge so that these people are not
condemned to their harshest sentence, but instead are given treatment options
and alternatives to their sentence according to the severity of their case, I
think that makes the most sense. So he would be in the position of judge more
so to lessen the judgement and increase the compassion, so as to prevent
someone else from taking his position that might be less reasonable about the
issue entirely. So rather than looking down on him for his sense of nobility, I
found that I came to quite the opposite conclusion, that this man was indeed a
good man, and that his judgment is indeed appropiate.

And it was here that I thought, "Texas is moving in the right direction." This
was even more so when I was called up. I was number four in line, and I was
called, and before anything, my lawyer and the judge began talking in vague
terms about some business opportunity. As we were going different ways, I
proded my lawyer about this, and he said that he is being pressured to join on
a committee, but he is not ready to yet because he wants to work as a lawyer
for some more time before resting on his laurels. After this, the only question
the judge asked me, after swearing me in, which I gave a "Yessir" to rather
than an "I do" because I didn't want to say I Do to a vow that ended with "So
help you God", he asked me, "Where did you get the substance" to which I
replied succinctly, "Colorado." At this, he chuckled. I swear, he chuckled, and
said, "I'm terribly sorry, this is something where the legislation has not
caught up with the current times in Texas. For the love of God, stay clean for
6 months, and get this off of your record entirely." To which I replied, "I can
do that." From there, he asked me how I plea, and I looked at my lawyer to
confirm "Guilty" and said myself, "Guilty", and from there, we went off.

I then was required to go back to the probation office, for "orientation". At
this point, I also called Chris Konkol, since Nick is out of the office, and
told him that "something of a personal matter has come up that I have to take
care of, and I will have to take a half day, I might be back late, but I just
wanted to call someone and let you know." He then replied with, "Okay, good
luck," and I said, "thanks Chris, I appreciate it" and we hung up.

I then went back to the probation office, and waited there for a good twenty
minutes. I began to make a mind map for my dream, the dream I had a few nights
before that, with the FF6 book, and the three hooligans, and the mountain road
and the job interview. It was quite enlightening, and I must do such a thing
for all dreams of such significance from now on, because it was very
insightful. But eventually, we were all called, back, there were six of us, all
of whom I recognized at the court, and we were called back for our orientation.

There is not much to say about this except that we went through the trems of
the program. We are to piss in a cup, testing for eight substances, plus
alcohol, at the calling of the place to determine if today is a day to do it.
On top of that, we are to take a class, and then take two hair folicles during
certain weeks. It took me something like three mintues to understand
everything, but we had to go over it for what felt like thirty minutes but was
probbaly something like fifteen.

After finishing with that, I called the course, and I am enrolled to the course
for nine am on September the eigth. So everything is set for this, and within
six months of this bullshit, it will all be over.

Enough of this. Last night I did have a dream. It was something of a fragment
of a dream, and when I woke up, I remember thinking, "Damn, no dreams today."
but then after some time I remembered this dream. So the dream took place in
my dream version of the store. In the past, it has been explicetly sam's and
also explicitely Best Buy, but this time, it was explicitely a home store. I
remember, Anne Betencourt was in the dream. So the dream begins, or rather, the
first thing I remmebr in the dream, was being in the back of the store, and I
remember looking around back and forth down the isles, and seeing couches and
things, and I remember thinking, "Eh, I don't know what I am here for, let me
go find Anne again." I say again, because I know we had entered the store
together, and she was to assist me with finding some furniture for my room, but
we had split up. So after looking thorugh the furniture, and not finding
anything that fit, I went to go find Anne so that I could have someone to talk
to about the furniture. I do remember finding her, but I don't remember much of
if we said anything. We might have said something at this point, but I woke up
before I remember.

So the furniture store is definitely fullfillment of my wish to get furniture,
but the inclusion of Anne Betencourt is something else entirely. In fact, it
entirely makes sense to me, because the strongest association I have with her
is that, last time she visited, we were all having a conversation, and it was a
very pleasent conversation, and my mom made a comment to me, some time after
that conversation, that Anne found me very pleasureable to talk to as well, and
made a comment about it to my mom. I then thought, "Well, if only we weren't
thirty years apart in age, and if she wasn't your best friend, then maybe we
could make something of it." Of course, it was all said in jest, but I remember
thinking, "this is how these things happen." So Anne in the dream represents my
wish fullfillment to find a girl and have that sort of "instant attraction of
mutual pleasure in conversation." Something like that. And the reason she shows
up in the furniture mart is because, one of the main benifits to having a
girlfriend, to me, would be being able to bounce ideas off of eachother. Yes, I
could make a decision about which furniture to buy on my own, but having
someone else, someone who could be a girlfriend, there to bounce ideas off of
would be very nice. So that was the whole thing.

This dream was quite easy to analyze, and for that I am glad. It was very
short, and a dream fragment, but I am surprised something at all come out of
it, because quite frankly I tend to disregard these dream fragments as
insignificant, but really, I think they are quite important, as sometimes the
brevity of something can have more impact than something expansive.

That's not to say that there is nothing in these expansive dreams, in fact,
there is quite a lot more in the expansive dreams, but they are much harder to
unpack, and without the experience of interpreting these dream fragments, I
will have no possiblity of even beginning to unpack the expansive dreams.
