# 20180803
So today I had something of an interesting dream.

So this dream took place in my parents house, in a version of it from my
childhood. The schoolroom still had our seperate desks, I remember that much
for sure. Also, I know this dream started before my memory of it, but I will
simply go with what about it I remember. I feel as though this is another
duality dream, but I don't remember the dual of this dream that came before it.
Something might trigger it, but I don't remember it off hand, so I will just
write this part, and go from there.

So the first part I remember about this dream is my mother, and Tim Hutenson
from nextdoor (nextdoor to my parents, we would meet with them growing up
occasionally), they were talking about something about the employment of all
three of us. I remember hearing them talk, and Tim was saying that it would
only be right if he emailed all three of our bosses and "let them know". Let
them know about what, I don't really know, all I know is that Tim had some dirt
on us as a family, and he felt it was his responsiability to let our bosses
know about it. Well, I remember hearing this conversation in the dream, but I
certainly wasn't meant to, I was eavesdropping a bit, although they were
talking in the living room, and I was walking through to the kitchen when I
heard this, so whatever. Anyway, I remember later in the dream, after Tim had
left, I remember talking to my mom, and asking if she gave Tim access to our
emails, and she said that yes, she did. I also remember my dad saying to my
mom, "You know, if they get fired it's as much your fault as it is Tim's" and
at that my mom sort of shrunk down and said, "Well, I know, but he was very
persistant, and he is right." Something like that. Again, in my waking moments
I don't know what sort of dirt Tim had on all three of us, but in the dream it
made perfect sense. Anyway, I remember going to my email, and checking it to
see if there were any word from Nick, my current boss, and I had not gotten any
emails from him. I then sat there and thought to myself, "Well, I guess we'll
see when I go into work what it is I should expect," and I went to playing some
game on my computer there. This was in the school room, and my desk was the
schoolroom desk. I then remember having a moment of realization, like, "Oh, I
can check my sent mail, and see what Tim sent from there, and I will have a
much better sense of how to handle the situation when I know what he sent." So
I went to my sent mail, but I saw no mail sent to Nick at all, and from that I
deduced, "He must have just used our accounts to get the email address of our
bosses, but then sent him an email on his own." At this I was comforted a
little, because I knew it would be easier to explain someone independently
sending email then it would be to explain an email coming from my email
address. Around this point is where I woke up.

I am not sure what to make of this dream. I have been increasingly having these
dreams about work, where I either get fired from work, or the work situation
becomes worse for me in some way. It would be a great folly to take these
dreams lightly. It certainly has something to do with my disatisfaction with my
current work set up. I don't like it. That much is known. But there is more to
it then that, I think. It has to do with my work ethic more than anything.

I think the plan is this. Since I am not smoking marijuana right now, I can do
things more easily against my will. I need to get back into the practice of
doing things against my will. This is partly the case with my stagnation with
Russian. I will be at work, and think, "I don't want to do work right now, I
would rather learn Russian," but then after I stumble around with Russian
resources, and read around in circles for a good thirty to forty minutes, I end
up finding my way towards reddit or youtube or some other site, and I use it as
an excuse for my procrastination. I will say to myself something like, "Oh,
well I want to listen to Jordan Peterson's lectures, and I have a hard time
getting through them, and I feel like watching it now, so I will go ahead and
watch them." Something like that.

Of course, there is a balance here. One cannot simply go on with life expecting
to plow through everything.

I have an idea for language. I came up with it a few days ago, but I still have
not put into motion it's practice. But the idea is this. I will take some child
story, there are many of them through the resources I have found. I will find
some child story, and I will go through and use wiktionary to find the root
stems of all of the words in the story. So I will place into wikitionary the
words I don't understand, find their stems, and put a Russian to English
approximation for each one, and I will use that as a reference. Then, when I
read the story, when I come across a word that I don't understand, I will go to
the reference. From there, I will be able to create a sort of commentary on
each sentence of the story.

So with this, there are three aspects, the first being the actual story itself,
the second being my own commentary on the story, and the last being the
"essential vocabulary" required to understanding the story. This way, I will
get better with the vocabulary, and I will also have an understanding of
grammer, and an understanding of how the grammer fits into the story.

This will just be one aspect of my Russian though. The reading aspect is I
think the first aspect that will come. The sort of "hard mode" to this aspect
is the listening aspect. Being able to listen to a native speaker, or
television, or whatever, that will be the next step in this process, and it
should go in simultaneous to the reading.

I love чебурашка it is a very well done cartoon. He is charming and funny, and
the language is never overwhelming. There is a lot that is told in the actions
of the characters, and I like that a lot. There are other Russian tv shows that
I could watch. I forget the name of one of them, wind in the face is the
english translation, but I don't remember the Russian. That one was all right,
but it's not something I want to watch over and over to try and glance the
meaning from it. Cartoons and children shows are better. Something like Russian
Dora the Explorer would be okay maybe, I'm not sure if it exists. I will look
into more Russian cartoons, and watch them quite a lot to glean more and more
off of them with each watch. I think this is why children always fixate on one
story, be it Barney or Sesame Street or whatever. They are learning the
language from these shows, and they like them because the characters have a
sort of innocence that they share. And they like watching the same episode over
and over, because each time it is familiar to them, and they are able to learn
more about the language from watching this one episode. Each time they watch
it, they understand it more, and they get to the point where they have
memorized the whole episode, and when they have done that, you can be sure that
they know the entire thing.

Similar to a story I remember Lacey tell about Kinley, Kinley let out a line,
"Whatever you can tell to him you can tell to me," which was a line from
Frozen, and Kinley had watched that movie god knows how many times. Aladin was
my jam as a kid. Hell, maybe I could find the Russian Aladin. That was such a
good story. Aladin is a great story.

I am getting sidetracked now, that is sort of the point of this journal, but I
think I have made my point when it comes to Russian tv shows. Oh, I also need
to practice writing and speaking as well. Those aspects will come a lot slower
than the reading. The recall of Russian words is a difficult thing for me, and
it is more difficult then seeing a Russian word and saying, "oh, I recognize
that word." The ability to produce Russian thoughts, that is the true
difficulty, but it will only come after I become more familiar with the
inverse, with familiarity with reading Russian will come the ability to write
in Russian. It's a challenge, but it will come.

The thing is, I don't have quite as stable a system in place to do that. I like
the idea of finding Russian stories, and analyzing the shit out of them, that
kind of thing is my jam, but the opposite, writing in Russian, that is going to
be difficult. This is where the notion of memorization comes in to play.
Currently, I would say I have three solid verbs, four solid nouns, a couple of
prepositions, which I don't fully understand, and the nominative pronouns
memorized. That is it. So I want to come up with a system to come to learn
these words a little better. This sort of system, this will be tricky to find.
I think, when it comes to it, what I should do is try and memorize some
sentences for each new word. So each day I pick a word, and I aim to create a
sentence for the word. Also, typing out the words in repitition helps a lot. Or
rather, typing out the sentences in repitition. Even better would be typing out
the sentences in random order. So if I learn a new word, I think of three
sentences to write it in, and I write those three sentences each ten times, and
then I write out the sentneces in random order thirty times, ten each. I should
plan this across multiple days as well. This I think is the best system to work
on this. I like that. And each sentence should aim to use the word in a
different way.

This would also be a good way to learn different prepositions. When I discover
a new Russian word, I should discover also what sorts of prepositions go with
it, and seek to use them with the word.
