# 20180905
So I finally had some dreams again today, and they were nice ones.

I forget exactly how the night went, but I remember this about the nature of
the night. First, I went to sleep rather handily at around 10, and then at
around 4 I woke up and got up and drank some water and went to the restroom. I
then went back to sleep and woke up next time at 7:45, just before work.

I am pretty certain that the time before the first waking period was rather
dreamless. It was not entirely dreamless, but it was rather dreamless. So I'm
pretty sure I had something of a short awakening between 4 and 7:45 that was
the break between the two dreams that I had. In this break, I thought about my
dream, and tried to remember the key points so that I wouldn't forget it.

The next dream I had involved me describing my dream to Kyle, who had a similar
parallel dream in my dream world, and we started talking about the similarities
of our dreams, and that led in to the next dream. It was an interesting
phenomenon, and I've never had this happen to me in the dream way before.

So I will go over the high points of both dreams. The first dream first
involved Kyle and Ciara playing FFXIV together, and I remember being on
Discord, and hearing them chat about FFXIV things. Then, I drove to the new
gym, and from there there was confusion. I got a call from someone who
identified himself as a ufc fighter, looking for our gym, and I gave him the
address. Collin eventually arrived at the gym, and I told him two things, I
forget what exactly the two things were, but he said, "I don't tolerate liars,
get out." And I said that I wasn't lying, but he said to get out anyway. I
think it was lying, if I remembered the two things, I would have better
recollection of exactly how this went. I then drove too fast around a corner,
and ended up on top of some structures on the opposite side of the road way. A
man that reminds me of Brett my mothers cousin helped me get my car down from
this structure. We then went to his university, and we went to check something
about his principle, or his dean, or something. Then we went back outside, and
tried returning to the car by going over a hump, but the hill was rather steep,
and I said I just wanted to go around, and eventually the other guy agreed,
although he made it quite a bit higher on the hump. This is where this dream
ended. I will go in more detail after, I just wanted to get down the main
points.

The second dream, I was describing this dream to Kyle, and he was describing a
mutual dream. We were in the living room of my parents. He said he was going to
Plano gym. I explained that there was one over there and another over here, and
so he was going to the gym over there. He then said in his dream that I ran
over him in my mustang on the way there. I then explained, no, that wasn't me,
because when I was looking to get my car in the first dream, it wasn't my
mustang but instead I had to get the cadillac, so whoever took my mustang must
have been the one to run him over. Either way, Kyle continued, and then he
mentioned something about a UFC fighter being at the wrong gym, and I said that
that must have been about the UFC fighter that called me in my dream. We then
went on to talk about the UFC in dallas at the american airlines center, and I
was wondering who was on the fight card. As we started asking about the fight
card, we got transported over to a restroom area, of the american airline
center. We looked through the card, and found the main five and then "the
undercard" which isn't how the under card works, but whatever. At this point,
someone mentioned someone who makes bombs, and looked like they were carrying a
bomb vest. My first instinct was to give the man the benefit of the doubt, but
then I quickly realized that he was actually wearing a bomb vest, and for what
possible reason would he be doing that. So we hurried off, and I took the rear.
Mom, and Kyle and Evan and I were the ones there, and we made our way to avoid
the bomb guy, but he kept following us. We ended up taking a duck and weave,
and we ended up at a restaurant, which we decided would be good to eat at. We
got a table, and it was a large table, so we ended up sharing it with some
women. Alcohol was mentioned, and I had to say that I couldn't drink alcohol.
Then, a girl came up and asked me to dance, and I told her that she would have
to teach me the steps. We danced for a bit, and I was very clumsy with the
dance steps, and that was the dream.

Now I want to go more in detail. I am particularly bad about jotting the high
points, because this whole description shows that I really wanted to go into
detail at basically every point, but whatever. I probably won't do that again
in the future.

So the first dream started, or at least I think it started, with me going back
to FFXIV. This came from the fact that, two days ago, when I was in a bit of a
depressive mood, I went back and stumbled upon some videos I had taken of one
of our alt A6S clears, with me as a scholar. The video was an hour and a half
long, and I watched it for maybe forty minutes. This definetly made me
reminisce about "the good old days", but I turned off the video and went to
something else to reoccupy my mind. But that was where this came from. So I
remember being in the FFXIV dream world, and it was very similar to dreams I
have had about it when I first came to the point where I knew I was quitting
the game. It was a sort of windey hallway, like a dungeon in the game might have
been, and there was something of a glow from a crystal (there is that crystal
imagary again) and I remember getting on discord, and seeing that both Kyle and
Ciara were in the same discord.

At this point in the dream, I remember thinking, hmm, I wonder if she is going
to do anything with him knowing that he is my brother. What an interesting turn
of events that would be. So I decided I would do my best to eavedrop on them.
But then I remembered that I couldn't eavesdrop on the conversation without
them knowing that I was in the room, so I went to a different room, so it
wouldn't seem like eavesdropping, but I could still see if they were in a room
together.

At around this point, I had started to make my way to the gym. I remember I had
to navigate to this new place, because I didn't know the address, so it wasn't
automatic. However, I simply remember it not being automatic. I ended up at the
gym though.

So the description of this gym is going to be quite difficult to explain. It
was rather run down, it was a sort of shack almost, with a small parking lot
and a small building. I am trying to come up with the best analogy I have for
the gym. It is surely like a real life place that I have been to before. Maybe,
similar to the chipotle that Mom and I went to when we were helping Kyle move
in. Something like that. That would make sense, with the analogy of moving in,
since Collin is moving in to his new gym now. The analogy is certainly not very
strong, it must be combined with something else. It remindes me of one of the
marijuana stops I stopped at in Colorado Springs also, in the way the parking
lot was layed out in relation to the store itself.

So enough association, let me just describe it. So the lot itself was rather
small, but went across the whole of the front of teh "shack". If you imagine
Royal lane going north, then the western side of this whole thing was touching
royal lane, and the whole north side of the curb there was parking lot. The
entrance was on the north side, at the furthest east. So as you enter from this
entrance, you turn right, and the entrance to the shack is on your left, and
the parking is either up to the shack, or on the right. I parked in the most
far corner as I always do. As you enter the shack, which you have to go up some
stairs to get to, you are met with a sort of entryway. To the right of this
entry way are some back rooms, which were open, but I didn't ever go in them.
Then, as you pass the entryway, you enter the living room. This living room
would be where the mats would be, but as it was it was carpeted. I remember
also that there was something like a counterspace, like a bar, that went across
the back left corner of the room. Around this bar area were Chris and Jami
Nelson. Then, towards the back right corner, there was a downward step to
something that resembled a laundry room. Alvis and Dani were in this room.

So I remember, as I drove up, and I was entering the place, I got a call. It
was from an unknown number, (which I have been getting quite a few of recently)
but I decided to answer it anyway. On the other end, someone was asking how to
get to the gym. I tried to determine who it was, he gave his name, and I vaguly
recognized it, but I still inquired anyway, to get a better handle about who he
was, and I asked if he was looking for the BJJ gym, and the guy said yes, he
was. He then went on to tell me that he was a UFC fighter competing in the
upcoming UFC event, and that Collin told him that he could stop by and train
with us to help prepare. I then said, "Ah, very cool, yeah" and then I started
to describe the situation to him. "So we have two gyms, one in the plano area,
and one out here in Irving. From what I understand you went to the plano one,
but I can give you the directions to the Irving one." (I might have said
Rockwall gym, but in my head on my internal map, I was thinking about a place
in Plano.) I proceeded to tell him that I would text him the address, and he
said that he wanted to know approximately where it was from where he was. I
then tried to conjure up the street names, and I said, "It's between Belt line,
and Royal lane, but closer to Royal lane." He then sounded disappointed, and I
remember thinking that he wasn't going to come anymore, as if this whole racket
was enough to convince him not to come, and he might have had better things to
do or better prospects to train at or something, and so he said something like,
"Okay, I'll see you there." ANd I said, "All right, see ya" and we hung up.

He never showed up in the dream.

So after this, I went inside. I talked a bit with Chris and Jami, and talked
with them for a bit about I don't remember what. Then I went into the back, and
talked with Alvis and Dani a bit as well. Then, I turned back around, and went
back into the living area (this whole thing was rather small, the living area
was probably six feet by six feet wide, something like that, so it felt rather
cramped) and at around this time, Collin came in.

Now, like I said in the summary, there were two things that were said between
he and I. They might have been, "The UFC guy called me, and he said he was
coming over" That might have been it. Let's go with that is it. Because then
Collin said, "Don't lie to me, I don't tolerate liers, get out" and he pointed
to the door. I then, taken aback, retorted "No, I'm not lying, that's what he
said, I don't know if it's true or not, but that's what he said, I'm just
telling you like it is." and Collin insisted a second time for me to leave. So,
a little disoriented from this behavior, I left, got in my car, and drove off.

So at this point I know it was my mustang that I drove in. I remember getting
on Royal lane, and driving rather quickly down the road, because it was night
time (it was night time throughout the dream) and there were very few cars on
the road. However, I got to a bend in the road, as the road turned left, and
then turned back to the right, as I turned left, I realized that there were a
lot of stopped cars, way more than I had anticipated, at the turn to the right,
and I was going much to fast that I would have to hit them at the speed I was
going and at the short distance that they were from me. At this point, I made a
split second decision, because I didn't see any oncoming cars, I decided I
would turn into oncoming traffic. So I did, and then I made the right turn
around the corner that I talked about, and the right side of the road was
filled with a bunch of cars waiting at a stop light, and the left side, the
oncoming side that I was on, had a good number of cars that were coming to me.

So at this point, I was faced with the decision of trying to weave through the
cars, or go to the sidewalk, and I decided to go to the side walk. At this
point, it's important to mention that, left of the sidewalk, (west of the road,
since I was going north) there was a drop off into a lake thing. The
intersection was very similar to the intersection of MacArthur and Royal irl.

So I was going on the sidewalk, along the way, and I was doing my best to come
to a stop, but as I went, the sidewalk actually had a sort of tier-ed
structure. This doesn't make any sense in terms of an actual sidewalk, but the
way it went, it was almost like there were greek columns, that lead to
different layers of the sidewalk, or structure, and so I ended up navigating
these different levels, and I ended up maybe 4 levels high.

I remember, as I was coming to a stop, having a moment of "Okay, don't freak
out, you know how to stay in a lane, just drive, and stop, and it will be
okay." And then when I stopped, and evaluated the situation, I thought, "How am
I ever going to get down from here." Was four levels high on this structure.

I got out of my car, and just sort of looked around. I just sort of stood
there, and thought to myself, "Okay, let's be real with what's going on in this
situation right now." Mostly, I thought, if there were a way for me to get the
car down, how would it happen.

As I thought about these things, a guy came up to me. He climbed up from the
bottom, and he came up to help me. He was very much like Brett Chauviere,
Glen's son, my cousin once removed. But the fact that his name is Brett makes
him very much an aspect of myself as well. Anyway, Brett came up, and he said,
"What happened here." I explained the situation to him, but he was already
getting to work. He climbed to the other side of the floors, and started
pulling my car off to the side that was the lake side, and he pulled it over
and scooted it, and then pulled it over the side, and held it on his chest, and
placed it on the level one level lower. I helped him once he was getting close
to bearing some of teh weight, I helped him navigate it safely to the lower
levels. We repeated this a few times, until teh car was back on the ground
level, and I remembre thinking, "Wow, the car is a lot lighter than I thought
it would be, that's interesting."

Once the car was on teh ground level, I remember asking, "How am I going to get
it back to the proper side of the road?" At that point he said, "Well, just
drive at as you normally should. Of course."

But at that point, we just left the car there, and he beckoned for me to follow
him. We went further down Royal lane, past Macarthur, and we walked along for a
ways. After we crossed under George Bush tollway, we continued on for a bit,
and then turned left into what I knew to be a university. But it was one
building. So we walked in to this building, almost as if Brett knew the codes,
but I thought that he was illigetametly getting in to the place, and we went
in, and we went in to the office of the principle. We went into the office, and
Brett rummaged through some papers. Once he was satisfied, he said good, and we
locked up eveyrtihng and walked out. This whole time, there were people in
other offices, glass offices, that were casually observent of us, but never got
up from what they were doing to stop us or anything.

So after we got out, Brett started explaining, "Sometimes the principle is
concerned with what I do and how I do it and all of that bullshit, so I had to
come here to be sure that either he wasn't aware of us, or if he was I would
need to explain in great detail what we did today. But it's all good, he wasn't
aware, either way I needed to come here." I didn't quite fully understand, more
than the fact that Brett was a student in this university, and that he had to
report to a principle for some reason. Still, the exact nature of this
character alluded me somewhat.

As we were walking back to my car, and we made it back to bush and we were to
cross under it again, this time there was a large hill that the straight path
would have us go over. Brett just started going over this hill, and I started
on it, but quickly realized that it would be quicker and easier to go around.
Brett had already made it quite a ways up this hill, but it was really steep,
and I told him that I was going to go around, along the flat way, rather than
over. Brett, at one point about halfway up, agreed that he would do the same.

So I had to take a break here, because I have been typing for quite a while.

At around this point I woke up, and I remember thinking, as I lay there (and I
am rather convinced that this was after my waking moment, or else I would have
gotten my phone) that I needed to remember this dream, or else I would forget
it. I had a moment where I said to myself, "This dream is so memorable that I
won't forget it," but then I reminded myself that it doesn't work like that,
especially since I judged the light outside and determined that I would be
sleeping again, so I went over the biggest points that I remember about the
dream. I thought, "This dream has three things, a beginning, a middle, and and
end, and I want to remember it in that way." Of course, there were more than
three things going on, but I think I have determined that the best way to
rememebr a dream is to remember three scenes, and in this case it was the FFXIV
intro, the BJJ gym, and then the scene with the car. From there, I am rather
confident that I remember most of the rest of the dream.

So as I was laying there, coming up with the way to remember this dream as best
I could, I drifted back in to sleep. To put it that way is a little misleading
though, because more accurately I would say that I was never really quite
awake, I was half asleep the whole time, and rather I was simply thinking in
this half sleep state the entire time, and I gradually became less aware of my
waking state again.

So the next dream started, and the scene was my parents house. I was in there,
and my mom was there, sitting in her chair, and I was sitting on the couch, and
Kyle was sitting on the fireplace, and my mom said to me, "Kyle was just
explaining his dream to me" and as she started explaining Kyle's dream to me, I
realized that it was a dream that was parallel to mine, and that it indicated
that our two dreams fit together.

This fascinated me, and I wanted to talk with Kyle about his dream.

So Kyle entered the room (I forget the dynamic of this whole thing, he didn't
strat in the room, or maybe my mom and I didn't start in the room, I don't
remember) and I mentioned, "Mom told me that you had a dream, and I'm very
interested in it" so Kyle started telling me about his dream.

He said that he was on his way to the gym in Rockwall (the "other gym" from my
previous dream) and that on his way, I had hit him, side swiped him, with my
mustang on the road there. At this point I inturrupted him, and I said, "No,
that wasn't me, that must have been someone else, because when I went to find
my car to leave for the gym, I couldn't find my car, so I used Granny and
Papa's cadilac instead, so it must have been the person that took my mustang
that hit you, and not me." So, I don't think this is how the first dream went,
but this is what I told him about the first dream in the second dream. Kyle
objected, that he really thought it was me in his dream, and I decided to
concede that point, and asked him to continue.

Kyle continued, and said that, after he was sideswiped, he made it to the gym,
but on the way to the gym, he met a UFC fighter who was trying to figure out
how to make it to the Irving gym. And I said, "Yes, that was what happened in
my dream as well, that's awesome!" and then I asked, "What was his name?" and
Kyle couldn't come up with the name. I couldn't remember the name either (and I
could make up some names but I don't think they would yeild anything, the
person that comes closest to me is the guy who actually is a MMA fighter that
teaches at georges gym, but I forget his name irl as well) and since I couldn't
remember the name, I wanted to figure it out. At this point, there was a book
that was layed out on the stand there, in our parents living room, that was
like a flyer for the Dallas UFC event, so I opened that up, and started
flipping through that.

At this point, the scene dramatically shifted. Also, I want to make it clear
that we are moving on to the second dream. This is no longer Kyle's
recollection of his dream, this is a new dream, that starts at this point, in a
way. Just as a side note, I think it's really cool that I was able to tie this
dream from it's very beginning, to what I was thinking when I went to sleep,
and I was more or less able to put together everything that happened in my
waking consciouness, to teh dream itself.

So the scene now is something like the scene where there was a crossfit running
event in a recent dream, now that I think about it. Where we were was behind
the starting block of that event, in a sort of "side area." It was the UFC
event itself, and we were at it. When I say we, it was me, mom and Kyle and
Evan. The place we were in was off to the side, away from the main crowds, in
an area that was something of a side entrance. Like, it could have been used by
business people or truck people. It was open to the public, but it was
uncrowded.

IN this area, which was a part that should have curved around, it didn't curve
around, but instead came to this sort of knob. I could draw the layout, but I
will do my best to describe it. So the center area was like an oval, and we
were on the long end of the oval, along the outside waiting area, towards the
part where the oval should have curved around, but instead, it came to this
sectioned area that I am talking about.

So in there, I was looking through a sheet of paper that was on the wall. It
was a little booklet, and in it had all of the fighters on the card. And the
word "card" sort of took a literal meaning, since the fight card, each fighter
was on it's own "card" and this book was bound together. It was a large book,
and if I were to hold it up to my chest, it would have gone from my sternum to
my crotch, and it would have been the width of my chest. So it was a big book,
and it was attached by a string to the wall there. So I looked through the
book, and I was looking for the fighter so we could get his name, and I
remember at one point I looked through the book, and instead of trying to find
the fighter, I just started to explain to my mom. There were five fighters, and
I explained that these were the main card, and then there were a bunch of
fighters beyond that, and I explained that this was the undercard. Now, this is
not exactly how these terms work, but that was what I was doing.

So I put the book back, and this was the first point that I observed these
surroundings. As I observed, with my back to the hallway (I was facing towards
the way that would go around the oval, if that makes any sense), I remember
hearing a woman talk about this guy. She was sort of whispering to us, and said
something like, "This man is a known bomb maker, and he is carrying a bomb now,
you should be warry." And my first instinct was to give him the benefit of the
doubt, I said something like, "Well, if he likes bombs, then of course he would
make one, and who really cares if he carries it with him, he just likes them
that much."

As I was saying this though, I looked over to him, and saw that he was a large
man with a shaved head, and the typical thug you would see in movies and such,
and he had a vest on that was a bomb vest, very pronounced, and as I looked at
him, I thought to myself, "Even if this is just his hobby, it is strange that
he would wear it to a place like this so publically."

So I thought about what the course of actions should be, and immediately my
reaction was, "Okay, let's get out of here." So I remember corraling my mom and
Kyle and Evan, and said, "Let's go, come on" and I was pushing them towards the
hallway to get away from the man. I was pushing them in front of me, because I
wanted to take up the rear, so I could push teh rear, so to speak, and protect
them from this man, but my mom was insistant that she take the rear, and I
said, "Mom, no, we don't have time for this, I'm taking the rear," and I
foricbly pushed her in front of me.

There were multiple times as we went through the crowed that Kyle and Mom
looked back, and I remember telling them, "Stop slowing down, knowing where he
is isn't going to help us, we have to keep moving," and I remember just having
a hard time pushing them through the crowds, and a few times I had to forcably
push them in front of me again.

Eventually, we got to the other side of the arena, and I looked behind us at
this point, and determined that the man was following us, and so I thought for
a moment. Getting lost in the crowd didn't work, so I had to come up with a
better idea to lose the guy.

So I looked ahead, and outside the arena, it was all mostly city, but tight
interwoven city, like what I imagine Venice is like, and as I looked out, I saw
a part of the city that came out and turned to the right, so I thought, we
could lose the guy by going into this city area, and then going left further
down, so that when he followed us around the corner, he wouldn't be able to see
where we went after that, so he wouldn't know where to go. It was a very
unrigourous way to go about this, but I think it might give a clue as to what
this man may represent. But I don't really know. Obviously this tactic wouldn't
work for someone who was actually following us.

So we did this tactic, we went out, and we went around this corner to the
right, and then turned again to the left, and we couldn't see the guy anymore,
so I determined that we had lost him, as long as we didn't go back to the UFC
event, towards that direction that is.

The scene we were in now, though, was one that resembled something of a crowded
outdoor mall area. It was like an indoor mall, and the buildings around us
almost resembled walls, and they were tall buildings, all of them, but it was
like a mall. And at the immediate area were at, there was a table, and I
remember saying, "As long as we are here, do we want to stop and eat?" and my
mom said sure, so we were seated, and sat there. My mom sat at the head of the
table, and I sat on her right side, and Kyle and Evan were on the other side,
and the table extended out rather far. The table might have been able to seat
say twenty people.

So as we were sitting there waiting to be served upon, some more women came up
and sat next to me. At that point, we had water there. The women then got to
talking. When I say women, also, I mean, the women were well in their forties,
and the one that sat closer to me reminded me of some of teh women in
handbells, and the one further was a black lady, like a trim black lady. They
both reminded me of the kind of women you would see in something like sex and
the city, where they were constantly gossiping and such.

I remember the one closer to me said, "Why don't you have a drink," and I said,
"Oh, no thank you," and the black lady said, "Oh, I would like to see him with
some drinks in him." Something like that. And then they placed a drink in front
of me and said, "Drink, it's on us," and I was not sure what to say, so
eventually I just said, "No, I can't" and they were very much dissapointed.

At around this point, I remember them talking about how young I was, and how
much they would have liked me when they were my age. I was a little flattered.

Some time here, then, I young lady, my age, walks up to me and asks me if she
would like a dance. I was taken off gaurd, and said, "Yeah, although I don't
know how to dance very well, you will have to teach me." She said sure.

At this point, I must describe her clothing, because it was quite beautiful. It
was very similar to the swimsuit Kim wore in Seattle, in that she somehow knew
that it would be the perfect clothing for her to wear in that moment.

So she was wearing a top that was cut out at the sides, and had two strips
going down to cover each breast. The whole thing was a sleavless top. The
strips came down both sides, and were bound together around her waist with
another part of clothing. This part of clothing went around the entire waist.
The thing was, there were cut outs in this part. So it was like the clothing
was simply hanging in place, but it was still put together in a modest way. The
strips were tourquise, and the strip that went around was a paler brown color,
like beige. She was wearing some sort of pants bottom as well, I did not notice
this as much.

I don't know why this clothing seems so important to me. It struck me as so
beautiful, and it accented her figure in such a nice way.

Something also important to mention here, she was very tall, much taller than
me.

So I agreed to dance, and we started dancing. I remember at first, she started
doing some steps, and I didn't know what to do, so she started to instruct me.
She said, "One two forward, one two back, like this." and she was giving me
instructions. I rememebr thinking at this point, "Wow, she is good, she can
give the instructions for my part while she does her part at the same time."
Because the instructions for me would be backward for her. I was more
fascinated by this. At this point, I started to get the feel for the steps, but
in general, I wasn't quite feeling it, and I remember feeling dissappointed
taht I couldn't just pick it up. I felt inadequete, which is a theme that has
shown up in a lot of my dreams lately.

So that was the two dreams. I know I woke up from this dream as well, and then
I thought, "Shit, I have to remember two dreams now," so I came up with the
steps for this dream, which were "Kyle explanation, bomber, then restaurant."
I know I went back to sleep after this as well, and I may have had even more
dreams, but these dreams were fleeting and fragments of dreams. I woke up then
as I said much later.

I feel bad, I just want to say. I have work, I have to come up with some
Russian sentences, and some more things that I could be doing, but instead I
have spent the morning talking about these dreams that I had. Something is very
wrong in my life right, and I really am not sure in what way I want to fix it.
I'm not sure what is wrong, and I'm not sure if it's correct to fix it. It's a
difficult place I am in right now. I need to overcome it, and I know I will, at
least, I have to trust I will, but I don't know how.
