# 20180802
So again today I do not have much to say. I had many dreams last night, all of
which were pretty fleeting. I do remember having a vision of a sort of symbol,
the symbol that Kimberly creates for the time capsule before she dies. So I
know what that looks like now (it's the image of a triangular prism inside
another triangular prism) I have gotten to work and tried to draw it, and it
came out not as profound as it felt in my dream, of course, but it is there.

I also had dreams about the stretch of road between Plano Road and Central on
Arapaho, near my house.

I really do not feel like writing right now, I'll be back.

Okay, now I do feel like writing.

I feel right now, more and more lately, I have been seeing myself feel
inadequately satisfied with the things I do in life. I have moments where I
look out at the world and I say, Life is Good. But now there are times when I
look out at the world, and I begin to say again, as I have many times in the
past, "what's the point of it all?" which indicates to me that there is
something in my life that I need to change.

What that thing is I don't know. The reason I prompt all of this is because, I
just got finished with a lunch class with Jamie, and well, I love the shit out
of Jamie but she can be so scatterbrained and everywhere with the way that she
teaches things, and she is the kind of person to say, "you just do it better"
when you ask about something. The very opposite of my left brainededness, she
is inexplicable and wholly right brained. Which is fine, and there is a lot to
learn from a brain like that, but then you have Colin, (not Collin, but purple
belt skinny as fuck obnoxiously made of glass Colin), and it was just me and
him and Jamie there today, and his breath smelled bad, and his nails cut me,
and he mentioned at the start that I had a cut on my chin, and I swear it was
his nails which cut me, but even if it wasn't I was constantly getting scraped
by his nails. He is bad at BJJ, he doesn't understand shit about anything, I
don't know how he has a purple belt, I don't know what he does for a living,
but I can garuntee that if you put up my year and a half of blue belt against
his purple belt, whereever he got that thing from, I would choke him out in
every possible way I know how. I would have my way with him. I don't think I am
that much larger than him either, I am at a low point as far as weight is
concerned right now, but I believe I am in similar weight class to him. He
might be a class lower than me. But still, that does not come close to the
notion that, he is simply inferior in every way. But he has the belt, and he
has this way of inturrupting a flow. We will be drilling, and he will just stop
drilling, and start watching other people drill. I sit there, and I think to
myself, "what the fuck are you doing? Are you a little girl in a soccer game
getting distracted by butterflies and daisies as the ball flys past you? What
is this incessant need to stop everything we are doing and check out other
things?" I don't think it's lack of intellegence, I think it is lack of
wisdom. This is a notion that I have always struggled with. Socrates is famous
for saying something like, "If I am wise, it is only because I know that I am a
fool." or something like that. Basically, the truely wise is only wise because
he knows that he is a fool. He knows that there is no end to wisdom, and it
takes wisdom to see that. But what about the other end? What about looking at
the wisdom of others. Is it a different notion to say, "I know I am not wise,
but that makes me more wise for knowing that" then it is to say, "That man is
not wise, and that does not make him more wise. He is just a fool." I guess the
difference is the awareness that you are less wise. Would socrates have said,
"If I am wise, it is only because I know I am a fool. However, that fool, I
know I am certainly more wise than he." That's something I struggle with.
Surely there is some wisdom in this Colin, there must be, and to dismiss him as
a fool would be labeling and boxing which I very much don't want to do. But
it's difficult. How can I say, "The man might have some hidden wisdom that I
don't know" when he is doing things as foolish as inturrupting the drilling we
have to watch other people drill? Such a base and despicable act cannot be the
actions of the wise. At what point, when you are drilling successfully, does it
ever become better to distract your attention away from that to watch other
people drill? It cannot be wise to do so. Maybe if there is something you don't
understand, you could stop the drilling and say, "Excuse me professor, there is
something about this drill that I don't understand." and at times this is the
nature of the drilling, but Colin, he does not do that. We will both perfectly
understand the drill, and he will stop what he is doing and cut off the
successful drilling we are doing with no purpose. Am I unwise to say "I am more
wise than that fool?" If it is wise to say, "I am wise because I know that I am
unwise." can it also be wise to say, "I know I am unwise, but I know I am at
least more wise than that fool?"

Enough talk of wisdom, my writing grows tangent to my original intention. My
real question is, how should I behave around these people like Colin. I don't
understand him, he doesn't understand himself. Obviously the notion of "tell
him his foolishness." is a foolish thing to do. I am at least wise enough to
know that that sort of action is always unwise, except in cases where such
souls seek me for guidance. If a soul is opening itself to me, that is a
situation where I might say, "humble yourself to what you don't understand, and
even to what you do understand, be humble." but to say that to someone who is
not ready to open up their soul, that will only close their soul more, and to
try and pry open their soul, that is manipulation. So suffice it to say, trying
to get the closed soul to open his soul is always wrong. Instead, all I can do
is keep my soul open, not with the purpose of opening others souls, but with
the purpose of living my life in that way because, well, that's something that
I believe in. I believe in having an open soul. I should not say "I only have
an open soul because I expect it to encourage others to open their souls." That
is wrong. Instead, I would say, "I should have an open soul, because I want to
have an open soul. The open soul is open to everything that may enter."

Indeed, with this analogy, you then have to say, "But if you have an open soul,
does that not allow the evil to enter along with the good." And to that I say,
with an open soul, all things are allowed to enter. Curiosity of what may enter
is the essence of the open soul. All things are allowed to enter. Good and evil
are only labels that we as humans put on things that enter the soul. I say
rather, let us think beyond that notion of good and evil, let us think instead
of everything that is, rather then everything that should be. And with an open
soul, humble yourself before everything that enters.

So what does it mean to humble myself before Colin? I think it means to
willfully accept his bad breath, to willfully accept his fingernails cutting my
chin. Such things, I am merely trying better myself in my knowledge of BJJ. I
am strong enough of a person to withstand the bad breath, to withstand the
nails. The real notion comes to drilling. I think a comment like, "okay,
buttercup, let's not get distracted." Something like that. I should ignore his
foolish comments. My soul is open to them, but my conscious, when it accepts
them, it discards them like trash. My soul should be open to all, and my mind
should work to discard that which is unneccasary. In that way, we create mental
pathways. And what does it mean to change the world if you can't even change
yourself? Change yourself, and the world will follow.

Okay, enough Buddha voodoo Ghandi shit.


