# 20181003
So last night I had a dream. This dream took place, it started in a parking
lot, very similar to my location of dream far north. It's in the rural part of
my dream area in the far north. That is, dream irl north, if that makes any
sense. You see, when you talk about the dream landscape, West generally
corresponds to North, but if you go so far, eventually IRL north becomes north.
So this is in the part, rather far out.

I'm in a parking lot, and there are a bunch of people exiting a building, and
making their way to another building. It reminds me of Jacquelyn's wedding,
with the sheer magnitude of people that is. So we are all in this parking lot,
heading our way to some other event at a different building. It's still in teh
same campus, but it's far enough that people drive. So I tell my parents, "I've
got a ride with this other couple, so I'll be okay." And by parents, I mean
mom, on the phone.

So I get in the car, and we make our way to the other building, where a play is
going to take place that we are to watch. But as we go, something happens. We
park at the other building, but their car has some troubles. And they tell me,
"Oh, would you mind watching our child while we fix the car". Something like
that. So I say sure, I don't mind. Turn's out, their child is eight years old,
in a high chair, in the greenway, and watching him sucks. He keeps wanting to
get out of the high chair, and I am getting annoyed at him. Eventually, they
come back, and say thanks for watching, and at around that point I wake up.

That's all I remember explicitely about this dream, but I remember having
another dream where the number 8 was super important, and the one that comes
after it was important as well. It was like, eight times something happens, and
then after those eight times, a ninth thing happens. I don't remember the dream
though, this is all I really remember about it. I have an image of myself being
patient for those eight things, and the eight things are not particularly
pleasant or gratifying. But that's all I remember.
