So last night I had three dreams that I can remember. I seem to have some
memory of a fragment regarding ping pong, but I don't know. Regardless.

The most interesting dream that I had last night, and the one that I remember
the least well, took place in my parents house. It was a sleepover, with Tim
Franda there. We were in the living room, playing games, and my parents are in
their bedroom sleeping. As we were in the living room, playing games, we come
across a small girl hiding in the couch. She wasn't hiding so much as she was
sandwiched in between the couch and the table. It's a sort of strange setup,
and I'm not sure how to describe it.

With her is also her older sister. When we uncover them both, I ask Tim if he
knows who they are or what they are doing here. He says he doesn't know. From
there we begin to attempt to try and figure out who they are, and why they are
there.

Both girls have something of an attitude. The older one has a sort of goth
attitude about her, a lack of care about the world around her. The younger one
is following in her sisters suit, even though on her own she is not really like
this. Asking them questions about who they are and what they are doing here
doesn't lead anywhere.

Then, as we are doing this, we take them into the study, and we find a small
little man. He was maybe two feet high. He reminds me of a TED talk kid I saw
once. In the TED talk, this kid had some disease which made him weigh fifty
pounds and have a strange appearance. This guy sorta reminds me of him. He
small, and dwarfish, and he walks around in a small person sort of way. He was
not very large, not like a midget, but instead just an innocent kid/adult
thing with a hobble.

So we find this guy, and we start to ask him about who he is. Tim knows him,
and he sort of laughs that he is here.

As we are continuing to try and figure out who these girls are, the little man
hobbles on to the back room, where my parents are sleeping. He wants to ask
them if they know where the girls came from. As soon as he starts hobbling to
the back room, I try and stop him, talking off to him as he goes back, telling
him to stop, but he doesn't, he just keeps hobbling his way back, and so I
follow him.

When I get back, he has already woken my parents up. I try and recover the
situation, letting them know what's going on and why this little man has
hobbled back here, and I try to tell them that everything is under control and
that we don't need their help. But still, they both get out of bed, notably my
dad, and my dad starts going off about these girls. I honestly don't remember
what he is going off on, but he starts going off about random stuff. What I do
remember is that what he's going off on is something taht is totally under
control. It's something that he might have been able to know or would have
handled in a different way, but his outrage was not at all justified.

As he was screaming, there was another person there, one of "Kyle's friends"
(although not any of Kyle's IRL friends, just a dream person who is one of
Kyle's friends) and he was afraid that my dad would lay into him and that he
feared my dad's outrage would be directed to him. I then comfort him, telling
him that my dad is very much upset over silly nonsense, and that if he starts
laying into him, I would intervene and act as a sheild and try and deflect as
best I can. Kyle's friend is then relieved, and then says something like, "Oh,
okay, that's good, I don't have to worry about how I act now." I then said,
"Whoa, I mean, if he has justified reason to be mad at you, you're on your own,
I'm just saying if he keeps going on like this then I'll stand by you."

That was about the extent of the dream that I remember.

The second dream that I remember was something of an interesting dream. It
didn't have a plot so much as it was just the exploration of a house. But the
start of it does have something of a plot.

So the family is planning a vacation with the Franda's and I am to meet at the
house set off. In this dream, we have just recently gotten a new house, and my
parents have offered to let me live there. I declined.

When I get there, I walk up to the front porch, which is a sort of gated area.
The house is four stories tall, and has a view out to "the city". Which city it
is, I don't know, but it's a gorgeous location anyway.

I get there, and Evan hands me a keycard, and tells me that I can use that to
get in. At this point, we have a short conversation, where I ask him if he is
okay living with my parents like this, and he says he is, so I don't question
him any more. I use the keycard, and walk in the front door.

At this point, the dream is mostly just exploring the house. The front area has
something of a hallway. The whole design of the house is very modern. There are
a lot of wall length windows and such, and furnature that has that square and
sleek feel to it. The lighting is also pretty modern, with fancy lamps and
stuff. It's also made mostly out of wood and black painted sleek walls. It's
very much the sort of thing that you would see in a magazine.

So when I walk in, to the right is the kitchen area, with my mom there. She
stops what she's doing and says she wants to give me a tour. So straight ahead
from the kitchen area is the living room area, and to the right, outside, is
the outer area. The outer area is mostly a pool that spans the entire place,
and there is actually furniture and such in the pool. The whole thing is super
sleek.

We then go up to the second floor, which is about half the square footage of
the base level, and this floor I honestly don't remember much of what it is. I
do remember the third floor was the "kids bedroom" which was a large area with
different ups and downs, where you could lay out beds and stuff, and where we
were to sleep. Then the top floor was a "cozy area" where there was a table, it
had it's own kitchen, and there were board games.

At the end, my mom asked me what I thought of the house. I remember thinking,
"It's all very overkill" and I didn't really like it, but I tried to come up
with the best that I could and I said, "Well, I like this top floor, I think
it's pretty cool." She noticed that I was trying to be nice, but accepted the
compliment none the less.

The last dream that I had involved
