#20180720 Dream: Coffee disaster - Dragon and the King
So last night I did have a dream, it was a sort of short dream, but it was
there non-the-less. This dream was pretty brief and I don't want to dwell on
it. Basically, I was at work, and I was demonstrating to my co-worker the
proper way to make a french press coffee, and as I was doing so, I began
measuring out the amount, saying the importance of being precise with your
measuerments, and I placed it in the grinder, and ground it up using a burr
grinder, and everything was going fine and dandy until I put the coffee into
the press, and it filled up half of the press. At this, I did a bit of a sanity
check, and said, "hm, I must have measured it wrong" to which my grandfather,
who I think sort of showed up at the dream at that point, said, "Yeah, I think
you did." Well, the scene was still at my work break room, but in that room
there were my extended family, and some of my family I think but everyone there
was sort of in the background, and they were getting ready to go to easter
sunday church service, and I wasn't going, and my grandfather was there with
me, since he is catholic and always goes to the catholic service when the rest
of my family goes to the luthren service, and the times don't match up usually,
so it was just my grandfather and me there, and the rest of my extended family
was getting ready and making their way to service. So I started to empty the
contents of the french press, in hopes to salvage the coffee that I had ground,
and at this point I began making a whole mess of the situation. I was getting
coffee grinds everywhere, I took apart the french press and wasn't sure how to
put it back together, and since it was a dream the pieces were sort of changing
and morphing as I tried to put it together. That is, I would have piece A, and
I would place it on the counter, and I would grab piece B because piece B fit
into piece A, but as I went to grab piece B I would lose sight for a moment of
piece A, and as I went back to it, piece A would be an entirely different piece
than it was when I placed it there, call it piece C now. And so the pieces
began to multiply in the dream in this way, but I wasn't acutely aware that
that was what was going on, and instead I was just overwhelmed with the number
of pieces I was trying to put back together, on top of the fact that some
pieces were dirty with coffee grounds, and I didn't have a means to clean them,
or if I did I did not think to do so, and the entire thing turned into a whole
sort of catastrophe, and my grandfather mostly just watched there as I
struggled with this whole thing, and the last thing I remember was "Well, I
used to be good at this, and now I am just making a fool of myself," because I
was doing this to try and impress my colleagues at work. And that was the
extent of the dream.

So yeah, I don't want to dwell on that dream too much, I just wanted to write
it down before I did anything else. Currently, I have finished the dragon and
the king, and I want to go back through it and write a very critical analysis
on the syntax and tone of essentially every paragraph in there. I think I will
do that now. I might come back to this journal entry and extend it out a bit,
as I surely have more to say, but for now I really want to get to work on that,
and also get to work on my lit analyzer.


