# 20180710 Chiropractic care - Discovery of the Hermit
So today I don't have nearly as much to talk about as I did yesterday.
Obviously yesterday I had a lot to talk about about two days ago, and I think
the biggest thing I can say is that I don't think that the Caring Bridge post
will make the statement that I want it to make. I reflected on it a bit, and I
think that my ego is still trying to greatly to make a point, and my own agenda
is coming through in the post, which isn't fair, and doesn't make sense. So for
the time being, I think I will pass on making a post.

I know I had some sort of fleeting dream yesterday, but it wasn't significant
enough for me to remember it or even if I did it would be one of those dreams
that just sorta is there and I wouldn't dwell on it too much.

So I think the starting point for my disscussion today will be of my experience
with the chiropractor. So yesterday I had my first visit, and we went through a
lot of tests, I mentioned what happened, he checked my reflexes, he asked me if
I hurt when I moved in certain ways, and etc. After that initial assessment, we
took some x-rays of the hip area, and after that we went back to the table
where he gave me an adjustment. The adjustment was not exactly what I was
anticipating (or rather, not as much as I was anticipating). We only did three
things, first was the neck adjustment, which happened way quicker and way
easier than I thought it would be. I expected that to feel like some divine
angel had come from heaven and given blessings to neck, but really after he did
my foremost thought was "oh, that was it, huh". Next, he did the thing where
you put your arms across your shoulder blades, in front, and you sit up, and as
you sit back, he will press against your back towards the thoracic area, and
extend out everything in there. That felt good, although again, not nearly as
good as I thought it would. Then he did the thing where you lay on your back,
put your leg out to the side, and you twist your back. First he did it to the
left leg (right side) then to the other side. That was the most interesting
adjustment. After that, he asked my to lie down on my stomach, and he hooked up
two electrode, one to the top of my ass cheek and the other along the low back,
and he started it and told me when to stop. He got to a certain point and said
that he didn't feel comfortable going anymore, but I assured him that I was
okay. Mostly, it was just sending electrical impulses through those muscles,
and they conctracted involuntarily, and I tried to do my best to not resist
tensing up because of it. He then left me there for twenty ish minutes, after
putting an ice pack on the area, and I lay there for a while just letting my
back and ass contract involuntarily for that time. When he came back, the
electric therapy didn't seem to do much if we're being totally honest about it,
but whatever. Finally he gave me his diagnosis, which was that I had probably
sprained a ligament, which as soon as he said it my mind went through to
reactions. First was, "wait, muscles in your back have ligaments too?" which I
then thought "well of course" and then I thought, "Yeah, that makes way more
sense then a pulled muscle, and is consistent with my experience of sprained
ankles." So all of that reassured me, and I left feeling now exactly relieved
but pretty good about the whole thing.

Well, I went again this morning, and he showed me the x-rays that were taken,
and to be honest I feel quite enlightened now, for I saw something that I knew
to be true but never knew exactly how it was true. That is, in what I used to
express as, "my hips are fucked up due to lunging to one side all the time in
ultimate" I could actually see where the point in the front where the left hip
meets the right hip is mal-aligned. He said basically the "top" of my right hip
is further up than it should be, and the left side of the base of my hips,
where my ball sack comes out of (my words not his of course) is lower than my
right. And seeing that x-ray, I instantly was enlightened, because now I can
say, "I have seen my hips, and they are fucked up because of ultimate" but now
I can say my "Pubic sympysis" (a word I just had to look up and will take me
some time to remember) is out of line. He then had me, with both of my feet on
the floor, press inward to his hands, and my hip popped, my Pubic Sympysis (I
swear I'm just going to call it my ballsack joint) popped, in a place that I
have never felt it pop before, which was a beautiful feeling. I walked out of
that office feeling as though, this thing is not better, but I know now just
exactly how my hip is fucked up, and I know it what way I need to strengthen
myself and re-allign myself in order to fix it. He then gave me some stretches
to do with my hips, and the entire thing is very helpful.

So this is what I will say about chriropractic care. It should be the first
resource anyone should seek for things of this nature. I am not educated enough
to say which sorts of issues could be corrected with chiropractic care, and
which sorts of issues require more intense care, but like all things, I have
discovered it for myself, and I know when chiropractic care will work for me
when I have issues. I am more educated about my hip now, and the efforts I have
been making in order to correct them I can now perform with resolution. I have
narrowed down exactly what is wrong (indeed, I have been focusing on my left
hip socket vs my right hip socket rather than the ball sack joint all this
time) and so I am honestly very excited to get this piece of shit hip back in
its place.

So now that I have spent a good twenty five minutes writing down things of
little consequence, I do sort of want to try and discovery write some of my
characters for my story. I could try and finish the Dragon and the King story
also, but this I feel more inspired to do in this moment, so I will do that
instead.

So I think what I have sort of left off on was this. This story will take place
in it's own world, with it's own religion, and I want it to remain mostly
seperate from the current world with it's religion as much as possible. In
fact, as I said, I feel it neccasary to give at least some notion of "from the
author" about this story, because the concept of life having a meaning I feel
can only work in so far as this single short story is concerned. I am not so
concerned about delving into the mythology of this world, nor am I concerned
with the exact teaching of the hermit, or his visions. Mostly, the two most
important points are this. First, the hermit tells of a vision of the nature of
the universe, and maybe even the afterlife, that are unambiguous, and that are
in contradiction in some ways with the dogmatic view of Christianity. In fact,
I want my athiest character to say something like "If there were a god,
wouldn't he give us a crash course on the universe before he just threw us
here?" and I want that question to be answered in this mythology. Second, is
that there must be some sort of prediction about the doings of these four,
undeniably so, so that there is no question that this prediction indeed a
foretelling of these events. What I don't like about this is that it brings in
to the story the notions of pre-destination and free-will, and I don't that
question to be unambigous, (rather, I want that question to remain ambiguos) in
this mythology, so in order to get around that, I will have to some reason why
the predictions of hermit don't enforce the notion of pre-destination.

As I think through all of this, I think what I need is for this god of this
mythology to be not omni-potent, not omniscient, and not all of the omni
things. In fact, what I think I want is for the hermit to relay all of those
things in his message. I can also answer the question of, "well why does not
god just reveal himself to us in a straightforward way" by saying that this god
does not have the capability to do so, and very much wishes that he did.

The visions of this hermit need to be associated with some sort of traumatic
event. I don't have experience with epilepsy, but an epileptic fit would work,
but as I said I don't feel comfortable writing about such a thing and would
like to come up with a new reason. I like the idea of mushrooms, but I don't
like that because mushrooms have too much of an association with "hippies" and
"stoners" who claim to see god during their trips, and my reader might say
something like "so you went on a mushroom trip and you saw god and you decided
to make a story about it, huh?" And not only am I concerned with the concept of
mushrooms cheapening the story, but it also would be a discredit to the power
of mushrooms. Mushrooms are about way more than simply "I ate mushrooms and I
had a vision of how the universe is, and it is exactly like this" and that is
what this stupid story is claiming to be, and I don't want to give mushrooms
that sort of name, I respect the psilosybin too much.

So instead, I think I like this version of the story. This hermit, who lived in
isolation for a great time, was in the middle of a great fast, but during his
fast, something supernatural happens which destroys his natural food source. In
his fasted state, he decides to go out into the woods where he stays, to gather
some food, but maybe it's winter, and all of the natural food sources are
exhausted, so he goes out to hunt, but while he is hunting, he gets attacked by
an animal. And after he is attacked. Perhaps in his struggle he is able to fend
off the animal, but he is greatly wounded, and as he attempts to return to his
camp, he grows weaker and weaker, attempting to conjure up his energy to make
it back to his hut to where he has some emergency supplies that he has with him
in his hermatage, but he isn't able to make it, and collapses in the woods
where he believes he is doomed to die. It is at this point that he has this
vision.

I don't know exactly yet what I want this vision to be. Part of me wants to
avoid the typical "am I dead" schitck, but I'm not sure if I can avoid it.
Regardless, I don't think I want to dwell on, in this moment, what exactly the
vision is of. Mostly, I want him to meet god there, I want him to witness some
of the afterlife, and I want god to give him instructions on what to do when he
gets back. I certainly want there to be a manifestation of the afterlife in
this vision. Also, I certainly want this god to have created the universe, but
I want him to explain that he can't interact with it once he has created it.
Also, I want his visions of this god to be amorphous, perhaps even shifting,
and for this god to say that his perception of what he is will change as he
experiences him. So perhaps at first he might be a voice in the sky, then he
might be a goddess, then he might be an encapsulation of his soul, and then a
glowing light, and etc. and I can use this sort of imagary to create a neat
effect in the story. But like I said, I am not quite ready to discover that
portion of the story yet, and I am still bouncing around ideas in my head about
it.

Regardless, after witnessing the afterlife, and knowing it to be real, I want
three things to be given to this man as a result of this vision. The first will
be the promise of recovery and good health, in the form of something
ridiculous, like maybe an entire medical kit that would be wholly implausible
to appear. I don't like that idea as much, but maybe he will restore his crops
in his area, that seems more plausible. And I like that because it could be
interpreted as the hermit, in his fasted state, had merely hallucinated the
garden being torn over or something like that, but it is also something I want
to say that all of these things I want the dogmatic athiest to be able to come
up with a plausible reason why the entire thing is false.

The next thing I want is some sort of prediction, first a few general
predictions, with a timeline of events for when they occur, (with perhaps some
inconsistencies since this god is, as I said, imperfect). I want the god to tell the
hermit about these four characters, about how they all know eachother, and to
give some sort of background about all of them that only they could know. That
is why I like the idea of a murder, because that is something that they would
all for sure keep secret. In fact, when they begin to read the papers, the
dogmatic athiest could begin to accuse someone of out him (as I want him to be
the primary driver of the murder) and that this was some kind of cruel trick or
game or something else.

The last thing I want is for some way for them to prove without a doubt that
these things are real. I have just come up with an idea for this. At some very
specific place and time, I want it to be the case that maybe gravity can be
reversed, but only at a specific place and time (since this is all the god can
do, is coarsely play with the rules of the universe, rather than manipulate the
object within), and I want my characters to go to this specific place, and find
the entire thing, set apart and marked by the hermit, which is in a cave in a
distant area in the remote north which no one ever visits, (and not because
there are rumors about it or anything like that, but because the place is so
remote, and uninteresting that no one would visit there) and I want them to
witness something such as the reversal of gravity there (I would like to come
up with some better than that, but I can't think of something right now off the
top of my head). Whatever it is that they witness, it has to be something that
could not be mistaken for anything else but a miracle.

As I have been writing this, also, I have come up with this notion, an answer
two the question of "why doesn't this god just reveal himself to us" and I want
it to be the case that in the past he has. This is just an idea, and I don't
know how much I like it now that I think about it, but I could perhaps tie
things like stonehenge, the ressurection of Jesus, the pyramids, the prophesies
of Mohammed, and others, into this thing of this god trying to communicate his
existance to us.

I suppose, to, if I were to go this route, there should be some reason why this
god wants to try and communicate with us. Maybe he sees our misgivings, and he
is trying to steer us in a better direction. I just now had the idea of maybe
this entire universe is like a science project that he is being graded on, and
he wants to be able to communicate with us in order to get a better grade on
his universe. That notion is extremely childish, but this entire thing is quite
absurd. Even so, I don't like that idea as to his motivation for trying to
communicate with us. Maybe he just made this thing as his sort of toy, because
he was bored, and he wanted to play with something, so he made this universe,
but he had no idea how it was going to go, and when he saw it begin to explode
before his eyes, he wants to try and guide it.

I also just thought, just to give the whole thing even more satire, perhaps the
earth is flat in this world. I actually really like tying this whole thing to
the flat earth theory, because that just shows that this entire thing is a work
that is sort of satire, and sort of not. Indeed, if I take it too seriously,
the whole premise falls flat, and I don't want that. So I like tying this in
with Flat Earth.

That's enough for now, I feel I have discovered a pretty good amount, at least
about the hermit and the nature of his visions, enough to go off of. I still
have the issue of the exact details of the murder that these four find
themselves caught in, but I will get there.

Maybe they are all out hunting together, and they find this hermitage as they
are running from the authorities. As far as why they stop there, and why they
think it is safe to do so (surely the authorities know about he hermitage and
would go there to look, so that doesn't work). Hmm, maybe they escape the
authorities, and they overhear them say that looking any more is futile, and
that they will have to widen the perimeter. Or maybe they are simply out
hunting, but they are hunting in grounds, and they kill the hermit? I don't
like that as much, but it's possible. I will still have to think on it, nothing
I am coming at is really doing it for me.

I have a more concrete view of discovering some of the interactions of the
actual meat of the story anyway, so I will probably discover those before I
discover the actual nature of the murder. So I will begin to write those bits,
and get to the murder in its time.


