# 20181023
I had two dream fragments last night. The first was a fragment about my father.
This dream location is rather fuzzy to me, but it reminds me most of another
fragment I had at some point a couple months ago when there was a vast field
and in this field there was a single house, and in the house there was a tub,
and in the tub, there were unbelievably fuzzy animals that ended up suffocating
me while my mother bathed me. This was similar to that location.

In this dream, though, instead of being in the field and traveling to the
solitary house, it starts in the house. And it's not in a field, but instead in
a vast urban environment. And it's a different house than the last one.

This house had one room, with an entrance and a sort of back entrance, but the
room was so small that they were maybe five feet from eachother. It was as if
the front entrance was the entrance to Grandma's house. Actually, that
association is really strong here. It's a modern version of Grandma's house in
this urban environment, but only the den and kitchen, and the entrance from the
garage was the "front entrance" and you walk in and on the right there is a
couch that faces the TV, and then right of the couch there is a small kitchen
area, and to the forward right from where you sit on the couch is the other
entrance/exit. And all of this is right on a street that is busy, and has multi
levels. In fact, it's very sci fi in it's presentation, with multiple stories
of street and such.

So in the deram, it starts in this house, and I am sitting on the couch, and my
parents are going out to get my father his treatment. The only thing I really
remember about this dream is that they were going out to go to the hospital,
and I made the decision to not go with them, and they were not happy about it.
I remember feeling guilty, and the dream ends with me leaving and going
somewhere else, although not to the hospital with them, but just out of the
house to I don't know where.

The second dream fragment took place in a large area. It's hard to describe
this place. Let's say, it was perhaps 100 meters long, and 50 meters wide, at
it's outermost boundries. I don't know what the entrance is like, but when you
walk in, in the center, there is a wall. Behind the wall, there is a square in
the middle closer to the entrarnce that is simply a hole in the building, with
railing around it. You can't see this hole when you walk in, but where teh
dream took place, it's there. There was a blocked off area in the back left of
the building, and the back right as well, but the back right area was smaller
than the back left. Down the center was a sort of pathway between these blocked
off areas. To the right there were stadium seating.

So the dream starts in the sort of center area between the blocked off areas,
where there are foldable table set up and such. We go through the rules of this
game we are about to play. It's a four v four game, and I am on one team
against another team that has Troy. The game is played like dodgeball, in that
there is one ball per team, and they are trying to eliminate the other team,
but if any one gets hit the whole team loses. Then, there is also a sort of
game where, if anyone taps out, the whole team loses as well. And I have this
feeling that the game is more about the jui jitsu than the dodgeball, but as we
go over the rules, we immediately start the game.

After we disperse, I go over to the side, and I have a ball. On the left side,
left of the hole, I see someone from the other team. I approach him from the
side, and I realize that he doesn't know that I have the ball. In fact, he is
just standing there. So I think, "AHA, I can win the game if I just get him
with the ball." So I take the ball and I hit him in the right shoulder with
hit. He is confused as he gets hit, and I watch as the ball bounces off his
shoulder and hits the ground.

I'm all excited, because I think I won the game for our team, but as I go back
to the tables (Collin is working one of the tables) I explain what happened,
and they say that it's not just a game of dodgeball, and that the manner in
which I won was not valid. I say I don't understand, if it's like dodgeball,
then my hitting him with the ball should have eliminated the other team, but
they insist that what I did doesn't count as an elimination. I'm disappointed,
and I still don't understand, but I say, "Okay, fine, I understand," because I
am tired of arguing and just want to continue playing the game.

The referee argues that he needs my understanding in writing, and hands me a
slip of paper to write that I understand on it. This piece of paper was black,
and the writing was like a scratching of it, as if it were magical or
something, and I write, "I understand" (and I think there was another word, a
three letter word, but I don't remember it) on the piece of paper, and we get
back to playing.

Right as play resumes, I see Troy in the stands with the ball, and he tries to
pelt it at me. When he does I recognize him, and catch the ball as it comes
towards me. I then say, "Does that count as a win? Catching a ball in dodgeball
eliminates the player that threw it" and they say, "No, for the same reason
as earlier."

At this, I'm getting annoyed, and say, "Okay, yeah, that makes sense" and I
understand that the rule that applied to the situation earlier would apply to
this situation as well, but I still don't understand the rule in the first
place. So I'm really annoyed, and some members from the audience start saying,
"Look, he's on tilt, do your thing Troy." At this point, I'm in the stands, and
I'm actually above Troy, and I see he is stalking towards me, ready to wrestle
me and take me down to win the game.

There were two things going through my head at this point. The first was that
Troy would beat me in any wrestling match and the second was that I wasn't sure
if that was okay or not. After all, the two ways that I thought I won were
invalid, so maybe the way that Troy would win would be invalid as well.

Quickly, though, I realize that the second thing is just the part of me that is
on tilt that is talking, and that I should do my best to at least survive
against Troy. So we end up on the ground, and I am actually on top of Troy, and
he is attempting to sweep me. He has double overhooks on my arms, and the only
thing that is stopping me from being swept is taht I have my left foot hooked
in the rafters of the stands, and the way it is wedged, it is preventing the
sweep.

That's the extent of that dream.
