# 20181113
So last night, I had quite a long dream, but there was something of a jist of
it, the parts that I care to write down right now.

Something I do want to say is that I have been particularly lazy as of late. I
have very much lacked motivation to do things that I would like to do. I
haven't been to BJJ in multiple weeks, I've stopped doing crossfit, and in
general, I just don't want to do things. I have been spending my lunch breaks
taking naps in my car. I just feel it's worth writing this down. I have taken
to masterbating on a pretty regular basis again. I am replaying ffx-2 and I
have played around 15 hours in the past weekend. The thought of getting out and
doing something feels exhausting. I have stopped learning Russian for about 2
months now, and I have not been writing as much every day (clearly).

Regardless, with that out of the way, let's talk about my dream.

So there were many sort of fragments that I know go together, but I don't
really have a cohesive framework for this. Instead of going into detail, partly
because I don't feel like going in to detail but also because this dream I
think is not the most interesting to go into full detail on, I will just
explain the various fragments, and what I remember of them.

So the first part of the dream, I was in a room, and this room was something
like "my new apartment". In this room, there were my entire nuclear family,
including Jason. In the center of the room was a table, and it was surrounded
by couches. On the table, people were arranging marijuana in bongs and joints,
and they were smoking through the various means in celebration, and I was
sitting there, asking them to stop, because I couldn't partake with them. They
kept going on anyway though.

After this scene, we went outside of the apartment, and it turns out that it
was actually attached to my parents house. I remember looking around outside
the apartment, and coming to the realization in teh dream that this apartment
was simply an extentsion of my parents house. It was a slow realization, as I
first recognized just the kitchen, and then the living room, and thought how
peculiar it was that these things were so similar to my parents, and when I
realized this peculiarity, I started to realize that this was indeed my parents
house and that the room was an extension of the study.

From here, we went outside again. Outside here turned into a field. In this
field, I saw two cops. The dream became, for a brief fragment, these two cops.
One was shooting the other in a bullet proof vest, for the purpose of testing
the vest. They were actively on duty, and were doing this as a sort of routine
thing they did to make sure that the vests were still working. This had a
rather profound effect on myself, and is the most vivid thing I remember in the
dream.

From here, the field continues on to a sort of playground like area. In this
playground, there were some gymnastics equipment. I remember, there was someone
playing on the equipment, on something that resembled p-bars, and he did a
handstand, pirouette, and instead of dismounting, he sat on the ground with his
hand still on the bars, then he jumped into a backflip, and returned back to an
L. He said it was a progression to a skill that he was working on. Also there,
there were some other people, people that remind me of some skateboarders I
have been watching on youtube lately, and one of them mentioned that Jaws was
supposed to be coming. They weren't skateboarders though, but were there to
perform tricks.

I remember one more thing as we were leaving the park, I ran across some kids.
I keep running in to these hooligans, so I am getting to the point where this
recurring element is trying to speak to me. But this time, they weren't doing
any sort of hooligan things, and I don't remember what the contents of this
part of the dream were. They were just there, that's all I remember.
