So I don't remember the first dream I had last night, but I remember the second
one, and hopefully in writing out the second one, there will be something that
reminds me of the first. Maybe, but due to the nature of the second dream, I
don't think so. Regardless, here it is.

So the second dream starts, and I'm in the parking lot of the Richardson Public
Library. I'm on the side closer to arapaho, and I am sort of hiding behind my
car, peeking around it, watching for people coming out and going in. I see
mostly people going out, although I also see some going in. I am looking at
this to determine if the place is closed or open.

--

So I want to take this time to write about teh various types of Christians taht
I have encountered in my life. 

This is a rather ambitious undertaking, as to outline all of the Christians
taht I have encountered would be to take every person, and categorize their
Chirstianity in some way, and with that, I could create some sort of statistic
analysis. What I'm getting at is, every person has a different idea of what
Christianity is to them, and they have their own defintion of what God means to
them, and the spirit and the trinity and the soul and so forth, and with all of
that, every person has their own variety of Christianity.

My goal in writing this right now is to take the general patterns that I have
seen in those sorts of people, and to place them into buckets. Now, that is not
fair to place them into buckets, because each view is certainly nuanced to one
degree or another, or it might even be nuanced in it's lack of nuance, but
regardless, I would like to be able to create these sorts of buckets for a
couple reasons.

The first reason is because, in creating these different categories of this
thing, we can find something of a multi dimensional spectrum on which all of
the people could place themselves somewhere on. Some people may lie on the
extremes of some categories, and for certain people, their own self identity
when it comes to Christianity lies on these extremes, but for others, there
might be some sort of blend in these catagories that has something of an
interesting take on their nuance.

The second reason is because, in detailing out these categories, we will be
able to better say what the hell is going on with Christianity. We will be able
to take vague terms like the soul, or the spirit, or the trinity, or the
concept of heaven and hell, and take these terms, and say that for some people
these things mean one thing, and for other people these things mean another.
Just because these things mean different things for different people doesn't
mean that these things are any less legitamate. But what it does mean is that
there is possibly a very deep confusion and misunderstanding between
individuals about these topics, and by laying out what it means for various
people to be a Christian, I will be able to lay this out.

So with that being said, I just want to jump right in to what I consider the
most haneous form of Christianity, the fundamentalist Christian.

There are so many things about the fundamentalist that are simply patently
absurd. I'm not even sure where to begin. I think probably the most common
unifying principle of all the people in this fundamentalist camp is that some
form of literal interpretation of the bible, and also the tertiary and
supplementary work surrounding the bible, and the church, and the lore of
Christianity, is to be taken as actual fact, in the actual world. Statements
such as, "There exists a God in Heaven who created the universe, and he created
us in our image" should be taken literaly in the eyes of the fundamentalist.

This also includes the invocation of the use of the imagination in determining
what it means to interpret the Christian teachings. In other words, whatever
someone like this imagines about the way that Christianity is, is the way that
they think it is actually true. Or in other words, they believe that, since
they imagine it a certain way, that the way the imagine it is entirely the way
that it is.

Now, to what degree a fundamentalist will hold on to their imagined
understanding of Christianity varies from person to person. The most
psychologically stable of them will attend church service, and bible study, and
utilize other such reasources, and will appeal to and learn from those
fundanmetrnalists that have a higher stance in the fundamentalist imaginative
heirarchy than they, and they will use the informantion that they gain from
these resources to make sure that their imagined world, the world that they
suppose to be real, is in some way close to the way things acually are. But
others will simply hold on to their beliefs, and will only expose themselves to
material that reinforces those beliefs, usually ascribing anything contrary to
what they believe as "devils work" or some such nonsense, so that they can
safely and justifyably reject anything which doesn't fit into their imagined
world.

But regardless to what level they reinforce their imagined beliefs, there is
generally a consensus amongst fundamnetalists about what that imagined world
looks like. It generally looks something like this.

A fundamentalist would say that there exists some "other world". When
questioned where this other world is, or how we know about it, or when
questioned about the nature of exactly what way this other world exists, they
will geneally appeal to the "splendor of God" or something like that, and will
usually use the line that we are like ants to the glory of God. They will give
some reason why we, as imperfect humans, are unable to comprehend the glory of
god. But conviently, they are able to comprehend it enough to spread and
propogate the idea. Regardless, there is some belief that there is an
"alter-realm" or "spirit-world" or "other-dimension", and it's from this
dimension that god exists. God always existed in that dimension. It's from that
dimension that God created this universe. It's also generally agreed upon that
there are other beings in that dimension, consisting of the other members of
the trinity, being God's son, and the Holy Spirit, along with some angels and
aarchangels and cheribim, and other various celestial beings that reside with
god in this other world. It's also argued that this other world is composed of
two layers, a Heaven and Hell, and in some cases, a purgatory. Heaven is where
god resides, and hell is where the devil resides.

Now, the degree to which the members of this other realm are able to interact
with this realm varies between memb ers of this camp, but most agree that,
through prayer, one is able to have some sort of personal relationship with
god. By invoking some sort of ability to talk to yourself in a humbling and
fearful way, people are able to communicate with God. Some will claim that they
have felt god, and others will claim that God works "in mysterious ways" but
the consensus is, if you are practiced enough as a Christian, you will be able
to connect with this other realm on some level.

At this point, various beliefs and imagined worlds may differ between
individuals. Some may say that the souls originally came from this other world,
and it's because we have a soul that we as humans are seperate from animals and
better than them, and it's generally agreed, regardless of the origin of the
soul, that a soul does indeed exist, and that what someone dies, their soul is
able to travel back to this other world, this alter dimension, and when it gets
there, the individual who possessed that soul would be judged, and the nature
and result of the judging may vary, but it could be anything from simply
sorting people out into heaven and hell due to whether or not they were a
follower of Christ, or placing them on various levels of sainthood and other
such status based upon how well they followed Christ and became good
Christians.

Among these, almost all of them exclusively believe in free will, and they
believe that the will is something taht was given to us by God so that we may
have the choice to follow him or not.

So again, I want to say that some of the details of exactly how this nether
world works, and exactly in what ways the beings in this nether world interacet
with the people of earth, and also in what we are able to interact with this
nether world both while alive and after we die, all of these things vary from
person to person. For instance, a Calvinist believes in manifest destiny, and
they believe that "God's Plan" is a literal plan that we can do nothing to
fight, while other protestants believe that 
