# 20181001
So I have decided to just try and get the most out of what I remember out of my
dreams. I am frustrated, because last night I know I had many dreams, and they
were so fluid and seamless, but I wake up now, and I think back on them, and I
don't remember details, and it's frustrating. I would like to be able to just
go back and remember everything from beginning to end, but I can't do that, and
it takes so much effort to try and conjure up the memory of everything. So
instead, today, what I am going to do, in an effort not to get paralyzed about
writing this shit down, is I am going to write down what I remember, and if I
don't remember something, fuck it.

So the first dream took place in the dream version of the old bayhouse. I was
on the second floor, and I remember masterbating, but before I came, I remember
seeing a ton of semen on the floor. I remember thinking "How did this happen? I
haven't even cum yet." but I proceeded to try and clean it up. At that time
though, there were my Aunt and Uncle and Papa outside, and Papa came up the
stairs, so I layed down and pretended to be asleep, but he whispered in my ear
and told me he knew and that it was okay.

The second dream takes place in a dream version of a house that is very much
like the Franda's. There is a party. There were two groups of people, one being
a group of girls at a table, and the other being some people hanging out on teh
couch. So I went, and I started talking to the group of girls, and I remember
asking them if they liked marijuana, and I don't remember their reply, but they
said if I liked marijuana, that there might be someone who is smoking. Sure
enough, someone comes up from the couch with a joint, and they say, "There, you
should join him." But I say, "No no no no." and move on. There was more to this
dream after this, I feel like I talk with a lot of Alliant people, but I don't
remember.

The last parts of the dream were a bunch of fragments. The one thing I do
remember is being in the dream version of a parking garage. I have been in this
dream garage before. It's rather large, and it has bus stops inside of it.
I remember there being Asian women in this dream. In one of the stops, the
ceiling is let out, and there is a bus that comes up. This was a fragment, and
I don't remember any of the other fragments.
