# 20180630 Dream, trapdoor and father, event of Papa and us at Bavarian Grill
So today was the day that I was planning on doing the speed dating event, but
that was canceled so instead I am going to plan on going to the Roughnecks game
in about an hour. I will arrive late, but fuck it, I don't want to watch the
first quarter anyway.

I still haven't decided if I want to do this journaling in the morning or the
afternoon. I want learning the Russian language to take priority, not only
because I do want to seriously learn it, but also because I feel that the
morning while the brain is still warming up is the best time to learn something
so taxing as learning a language, and my mind will be more receptive to the new
words and concepts and grammatical ideas in the morning compared to later in
the day, I know that. However, if I am to follow the trend of writing down my
dreams in this journal, I should definitely write sooner rather than later as I
am apt to forget my dreams by this time in the after noon. Indeed, it is late
now, 5:30, after the time when I would normally get off of work, and I had a
dream but I have forgotten most of it by this point, so that leaves me in a bit
of a predicament. I might elect to write about the dream first, if I have one,
and do this journalling just before I begin doing my Russian work for the day,
with some actual work thrown in the mix in the morning so I don't feel too
guilty about the whole thing, all before going to Jiu-Jitsu, at which point I
could return, do my work in the afternoon, along with whatever reading I want
to get done. That seems like the best course of action. Indeed, also, I feel as
though I tend to have the most ideas of what to write about in the morning, and
currently when I have those ideas, I will try to make note of them in my head
so that I remember them when I get to the journal, but later in the afternoon,
not only has the magic or spark of those ideas escaped, if not even the idea
entirely, but my motivation to write about these things has passed. I would
then leave my media consumption to the evening, be that a Russian TV show, or
novel reading, or my mastabatory youtube watching, just before bed as I am
eating my meal for the day. I think that is the best course of action when it
comes to the schedule for how these things will probably end up turning out.

So about this dream. Like I said, I don't remember much about my dream. I know
earlier in the day I had memory of it before the point that I have memory now,
but the earliest I can remember is, I was in a sort of rusty trapdoor, and I
was walking back in to it after looking around for my father. I was looking
around this area, and I don't remember what happenend at that point or what the
area was like, but I do remember having a sort of sense of "actually, let's
pretend like I was never looking here and escape back and pretend like I wasn't
doing this" which I think is probably a sense of my feeling to be with my
father followed by my recent events of calling myself a righteous fool put
together in a sort of dream way, and so after I was done exploring this area, I
was going to go back down into this rusty trap door which led to I don't know
where, at which point my father, along with some of his work colleagues which I
have never met but heard of before and have pictures in my head of what I
imagine their faces look like, finds me escaping down this trap door and says
something like "Hey, what are you doing here," in a very good natured and
surprised to see me sort of way. I remember at that point, I had that instant
where, when you are trying to fabricate an alibi, and the entire reason for
that alibi vanishes instantly before it can be used and you decide to entirely
abandon it and pretend like you weren't trying to fabricate an alibi, at that
moment I entirly abandoned my alibi and immediatly came up with a different
one, closer to the truth, saying that I was just coming here to look for him,
which was partially true but I made it sound like I had just started looking
and was coming up the trapdoor rather than going down it. My father took this,
and I came up to him, and the only other thing I am able to remember about this
dream was that, after I woke up, I got the very strong feeling that one does
when having a dream that it was my dream self understanding the situation
better than my real self, and that my father was good enough to visit today and
that I should go through with my plan to visit.

So taking this article through the rest of the day then, most of this day I
have been scraping through resources on the Russian language, looking through
various textbooks, youtube videos, tv shows, and articles, and whatever else,
trying to find the best resource for me to use to learn Russian. In between, I
began reading the B and N version of the Aeneid that I purchased some days ago,
and despite it being an somewhat archaic one, I find it to be quite readable
actual, more so than a lot of other translations of ancient works like this
one, and I quite like it because in the notes of the translation it talks about
the traslators great care in trying to maintain the tone of the original
without sacrificing the readability of it. The effect is something quite
noticably "old poemey" which I dislike a bit, but something which I believe I
will quite enjoy actually.

After doing that for some time, I called my mom and talked with here a bit. I
called her just before noon, after I was browsing reddit looking at my nsfw
subs for a bit and weirding myself out a touch, I gave myself ample time
in-between doing that and calling her so as to not feel so strange about it. In
fact, I think that is when I read the aeneid. Regardless, when I called her,
she was clearly distruaght to a point, but I feel she is staying strong, but
she was talking to be about my fathers condition, and she mentioned his dignity
(which was the word I was looking for earlier, I used pitiful earlier, but
dignity is a much better word here) and I mentiond that I entirely understad
that. Basically, I would have visited, except that she was planning on coming
back to the house to shower and gather herself and work through an issue with
her Fidelity credit card and other such housekeeping things, as well as to
visit Kyle and Evan and Granny and Papa while they were all together at the
house, and so I decided that while she does all of that, it made the most sense
to me to forgoe the visit today, and make the visit tomorrow. I don't imagine
that my fathers condition will be any different tomorrow, but my mom
understands as I do that the visit is certainly not going to be a sociable one,
as all sense of modesty and visitation has entirely vanished as of late. She
mentioned something about the doctors wanting to give my father steroids to
stop the "turf war" as she called it between my dad's still fighting cells and
Evan's transfused cells, and apparently that turf war is still going on to an
effect that is beyond what they had hoped for, and if it continues this way
they will hope to give him steroids which will kill a lot of the transfused
cells so they really don't want to do that but they might have to. I don't know
how that all works, as I am not a doctor after all, but regardless, my father
is in poor condition, but that was to be expected, and all of these things are
tactics that go in to the strategy of making a bone marrow transplant.

Also, as I mentioned, my grandparents are in town, and they texted me yesterday
asking me if we wanted to go to the german restaurant, the Bavarian Grill, for
dinner. I replied that I had plans for the evening but I could go late, and
that worked for everyone, so I ended up eating with them yesterday evening. I
had a pleasent conversation with my grandfather on my mothers side (indeed, as
you probably know my father's father was dead before I was born and his mother
died of old age about five years ago now) about his experience learing french
late in life like he did. I asked him at what age he decided to try and learn
French, and he told me that it was around his retirement, which was around age
55 for him. Mostly I was interested in how fluent and conversational he was
able to get with it, and he said that he was never able to get to the point
where he was truly thinking in french, and he was always thinking in english
and translating to french in his head. However, he also said that he only took
a nine month course at Rice university, and that he only visited france and
became immersed in it for a few weeks. He mentioned an incident where the train
they were on was coming to a stop before their desired stop, and the announcer
got on in french, and he was able to determine from the announcements that
there was an accident on the rail further ahead, and that they were trying to
clear up the accident and that there would be another train coming for them in
45 minutes or whatever, and he was able to determine that all through great
concentration at that moment, and that was what he felt like the peak of his
french had gotten too. Regardless, it was a pleasent conversation, and we
ended up talking about language and some of their travels and a bunch of other
things.

More amusing at this dinner event, though, was the interaction of my
grandfather with the waiter there. When we were seated and the waiter got us
our order, I could tell that he was not very comfortable with his position, and
gathered that he was probably new. I had ordered water, and I consitently had
to ask him to refill the glass, which is generally something that they do just
as they are passing by, and I wouldn't have minded so much if the glass weren't
so small (it was probably only a 16 oz glass) and if the glass didn't have so
much ice in it and if I hadn't just came from Bikram class and been needing the
water in a bad way. I mention only to illustrate the noviceness of our waiter,
which I don't mind (indeed, I could give my opinion on the uncomfortableness I
feel when being treated and waited on, but that's an entirely different
discussion). So after we finish the meal, and Papa goes to pay for the check,
the waiter returns after a bit of time, and shows him the card. He mentions
that something went wrong and shows my grandfather the black thingy doogy magig
foldy thing whatever that is called, opening it to him showing what I can only
assume is a receipt that says the card was declined. However, my grandfather
was not to keen on taking the hint to read what was being said, and the waiter,
bless his heart, was trying his best to be discreet about the whole thing, said
something like "well, it seems the system hasn't taken the card". My
grandfather then asked, "well is it your system or the card" at which point the
waiter says "well it may have been a bit of both" to which I could only laugh
because at this point I am thinking that the card must have been declined, and
my grandfather gives him another card and as the waiter is walking away, my
grandfather raises his voice to be heard across the table asking "well, was the
card declined or did it just not get run through the system?" at which point
the waiter, in all his attempts to be discrete at that point, eventully fell
into his ineveitable annoucement across the table that the card had been
declined. Kyle and Evan my brothers got great amusement out of this of course,
and after the waiter ran the other card and it was accepted, and my grandfather
had called Fidelity and asked about the transaction and found that there was no
transaction that had been run through there system (indeed, I have later
guessed that there might be something going on on Fidelities end since my mom
was mentioning that she was having troubles with her card as well), when the
waiter got back, and he and my grandfather began exchanging words, the
conversation went something like "well it seems the card wasn't even run,
becaues I called fidelity and they said they had no record of the transaction"
to which the waiter replied that it could have been their network and that this
sort of thing has happened before, to which my grandfather replied, "well hose
your network." Well, I don't know what the fuck "hose your network" means, but
the waiter interpretted this to mean "how old's your network" and replied that
he wouldn't know as he as only been working here two months. At this my
grandfather ended up conceding a bit, and the waiter walked away after
apologizing very sincerely for what was probably the sixth time in five
minutes, and asked us if we would like anything before leaving, making eye
contact with me directly and asking me if I would like more water. I could do
nothing but smile and say "no thank you", and if I would have been on top of my
game I would have been able to make some witty remark about the callousness of
my grandfather in that moment, but I couldn't think of anything clever, and
indeed have not come up with anything clever that I could have said to lighten
the situation even in reflection (although my reflection hasn't been too deep).
Indeed, this waiter should have just been refilling my water glass without
asking my permission to do so, so he was clearly quite new to the whole thing
and was only so unfortunate to come across my grandfather and his hallowed
fidelity card, and as he walked away, rid of us and entirely done with our
table as the check was payed, my grandfather began to laugh. And as my
grandfather laughed, I couldn't help but let out a good laugh as well. Indeed,
seeing him laugh with his great big belly bouncing up and down with each heave
of his voice, as his abdominals contracted and curled him up involunarily into
a hunched position as his laugh got bigger and bigger and less and less
controlled only made me want to laugh even more, and I decided not to supress
it in that moment, and I myself had a great good laugh, the kind of laugh that
you just let out in the moment as I could only feel sympathy for the poor
waiter and understanding of my grandfathers frustration. Indeed, that laugh
came out of me not out of pity for the waiter, but instead at the way my
grandfather handled the entire situation, with the least amount of empathy and
understanding as possible. To see my grandfather interact with that waiter was
something straight out of a comedy, a shakespearean comedy, where the actors go
back and forth with the most absurd clash of personalities, the one being an
old man with a lot of money who would never have his card declined due to a
lack of funds, and the other a young kid just trying to make the best of a
situation and acting in the most timid way. Innocent aggression matches violent
timidness. How funny that was. And I could have supressed that laugh, but I had
no reason to, and certainly a small part of me was laughing with my
grandfather, as I certainly have seen a lot of that assholery behavior in
myself before, but more I was laughing at the perfect storm that was that
scene, and the escalation it came to (indeed, it wasn't even really escalated,
because I know my grandfather and I know his kindheartedness, but that waiter
certainaly had not seen that side of him), and I laughed simply at the fact
that the escalation could have been entirely avoided had my grandfather had
just a touch of empathy for the man, but he didn't, and that was only all too
amusing to me. So I let myself laugh at that scene.

Besides that, as we were leaving I was able to discuss the topic of my arrest
with Kyle, and was able to get his side of the whole thing, which was good to
hear, as he rode with me in my car back to the house, where we finished our
conversation and I made my way back to my apartment.

Indeed, I have to stop now (I am quite done anyway) and make my way to the
Roughnecks game. That's it for today.


