# 20180729
So I currently have woken up with some coffee today. It's interesting, I did
have dreams last night, but I only remember the last one.

I know both dreams involved a work setting. I have been dream a lot about work
lately, and that certainly indicates something. I think it means I must be
feeling guilty about my lack of productivity in general, and I think I should
seek to rectify that a little better.

I think the best thing for me would be to simply remind myself that, even
though I am doing something not work related, and the guise is that "I always
feel like I could be more productive," I think the thing that I should remember
is, that I am pretty efficient when it comes to actually getting work done,
especially if I have Nick to probe as a resource.

I think what also helps would be to get the work done first, and then not check
it in, so that I can do these things more efficiently, and with less guilt.
When I am reading some sanderson and making notes about it, I feel guilty when
I have a bunch of work on my plate, and I am not getting to it. On the flip
side, if I have a bunch of completed but uncommited work, and I read some
sanderson, then I feel a lot better about being less efficient. At any moment,
I can spike my efficiency, I can stop reading, and get all of my work done.

Of course, there will have to be a balance in all of this, something of the
fact that I will have to start working on things, and once I get to the point
where I know what I have to put together in order to get them all done, then I
can do that, and I know how to do it. It's the balance of active
procrastination and precrastination that I have to get down. Too much of one
is, well, too much, it's definitely a balance of those things.

So to the dreams, they were both rather short, and like I said, they were both
about work events. The first was a party that was at a house that was sort of
like the Franda's house, at least, the Franda's house as it was growing up.
There were a bunch of work people there, and there was murmuring as Will was
about to get fired. I don't remember much of the dream, but I remember Will was
still acting like the character he is, even up to the point where he got fired.

The thing I remember most about this dream was, when I was talking with Nick
about it, he mentioned how he "Tested so many things that weren't relevent in
the testing he did, and how it was so much of a waste of time, it was
disgusting." Something like that, and this was said in passing, and I remember
shirking away from him saying that, thinking, "If you only knew how much time I
wasted while I was at work, you would be appalled." Something like that.

So the second dream, Nick was smoking a cigarrette while everyone else was
drinking beer from the Fun Friday cart, and I remember asking him for a
cigarrette. I said I don't usually smoke, but that I make exceptions, and I
would smoke if given the opportunity for the Fun Friday. I remember there was a
pack of Camel's that Nick opened up for me, and the pack of Camels, I grabbed
out of it about 3 cigarrettes, and Nick made a comment like, "Whoa, going big
there huh?" But I had unintentionally grabbed more than I meant to. THere is a
lot of symbolism here. The three cigarrettes I ever smoked in my life, they
were from a seven eleven from a pack of camels that I bought. Or, convience
store, I don't think it was actually seven eleven, but whatever. I feel that
there must be a correspondance. WHat I remember most about actually smoking the
cigarette was that I got a bunch of ash and my mouth, and I was spitting into
the ash tray the ash in my mouth as much as I was actually flicking ash into
the tray.

So that was the two dreams, interesting dreams. I remember waking up and
thinking, "I should go to a tobacco store and get some tobacco" but I still
don't think I want to do that.

Something also I want to say, yesterday, I did some edging. I still edge, but I
still haven't orgasmed since my probation started. If I am putting myself on
probation, I feel as though it only makes sense for me to give up all edging
and pornography as well. It only makes sense. I was very close to orgasm a
couple times, and not only the fact that getting that close to orgasm is a
dangerous way to accidentally orgasm, I shouldn't have the inclination to look
at naked girls and stroke my dick while looking at them.

I am not inclined to entirely give that up. It's just, I give myself the excuse
taht I am simply looking at the naked women just because I like the figure of
the female body, and some women are able to capture that well. But when I do so
with the intent of getting aroused, that betrays the intent of the probation.
So I think, I will have to trim my watching to only some particular subreddits.
It's a tough thing to do, but I think the best litmus test would be to filter
out all of the posts where the women are intentionly putting themselves out
there for men to beat to. I saw one post that was literally watermarked with a
website called "wankto.me". Shit like that, that is clearly not the kind of
nudity that I find tasteful, even if it is tasteful. I like the artful nudes,
and I like the female figure in that sense.

Pornagraphy as art, it's a weird thing. It certainly can be done, but it's not
very popular. The same reason Bill Burr got booed yestday for mentioning that
he meditated and forgave that woman for flicking the tip of his dick, that is
teh same reason why pronagraphy as art is so scarce. Shakespeare has it, I will
find it there.

I was watching yesterday, "The making of Titus" and that play, there is
certainly a bunch of nudity as art there. I am also reminded of an ozzy man
performance that he critqued, also very erotic, and very "pornagraphy as art"
as well. Such work, I love that sort of thing. And I am not arroused by it. At
least, I am not arroused in the way that I am aroused by regular pornography.
It might arrouse me, but that is simply secondary to my appreciation of it as
art.

The thing is, in seeking this sort of thing, I will run across so much
pornagraphy as indulgance, and I trick myself into thinking that I am seeking
art, when really I am just missing masterbation, so I go into this instead. I
will try and avoid that as much as possible, and when I do seek the art, I will
make sure it is with the intention of finding the art. If I am honest with
myself, and I find myself getting aroused, and actually stroking my dick, I
think that is where I draw the line.

I think that is it. If it ever gets to the point where I am stroking my penis,
I will stop. At that point, it is not art anymore, and I am simply browsing to
get arroused like I always do. That is that.

I feel bad about the speed dating thing. Although, again, I never got a follow
up or anything, I should have replied. Even if it was two weeks later, I should
have replied. But I am surprised I never got a follow up like, "Hey, we never
got a reply, does this date work for you?" I was waiting for that for some
reason, and when I didn't get it, and instead a Bill Burr concert came up that
was on teh same day, Burr easily won over the other thing.

I am not sure if I want ot visit Peterson or not. If I do, I should buy the
tickets now. Part of me wants to go to denver to do so, but I will be on
probation for real when that happens, and well, I don't want to travel without
marijuana. Definitely not in my car.

So enough talk now, I want to get back to my lit analyzer and continue working
on that. It is coming along nicely, and I like the way it is coming together.
It is just a matter of getting things in order how I like. I will be back.

So I have finish up my lit analyzer, at least the portion of it that parses
shit. I need to finish the part that writes shit, but that will be to come.

I'm excited about it, and that's why I didn't write as much later today, I was
working on that. That, and I went to visit my dad today. I can talk about that
tomorrow, but there isn't really much to say, except about my little excursion
back to my car. Or rather, the lack of anything eventful happening in my car.

