# 20181025
I know I had a dream last night, but I am having a hard time remembering what
it was. I know that, when I woke up, I had an inkling of something that, if I
could get a grasp on it, I could remember the whole dream, but I am not coming
to that inkling at the moment, and so the dream is not coming to me.

So I remember the context of the dream, now, but that is not spurring the rest
of the dream. The most interesting thing about the dream, I think, is taht it
took place in what is an amalgamation of a Louis CK concert and a wedding. That
is, the event that predicates this dream is either a Louis CK concert, or a
wedding, and the events of the dream took place in the aftermath of that event.
It was like a wedding reception, if Louis CK standup has a wedding reception.

So I will just try and remember some fragments. I know I was attempting to
navigate this reception, and I was being on my toes. There was an outdoor
balcony area with some tables. This area also connected to the train way that
was present in other dreams. It's the bus station that connects to a whole
network of trains.

Another thing that happened in this dream, Kyle was tasting some wine, and as
we went to the clerk to buy a bottle, he poured me a glass for me to taste.
I took a sip, and I remember thinking that the small amount of alcohol in that
glass would not be enough to set off the urinalisis, but I was scared of it
none the less.

It was actually a rather interesting dream, but I am unable to remember the
interesting bits now. It could be possible that it will spring back to me, but
I don't think that it will.
