# 20180714 Dream of a real life video game, of a childly recital theater - Discovery Writing Damien
So last night I had a dream, a dream that had some interesting points but as a
whole was mostly absurd. Granted, most of my dreams are absurd. This one is one
that takes place in that same world as dream Seattle, and the dream version of
the place where I met my dad and Chuck fishing, although definitely in a
different part of it. I know I had to go through the dream version of highway
635 to get to this place, and the end of the dream has my dream version of what
would analgolously be the whole mess of interchange that is 114 and 121 and 183
and all of those sorts of roads there (although in the dream version there is
no airport, it's just a lot of roads that have really elaborate interchanges.
Anyway, I guess, to get to the bulk of the dream, (and I honestly really like
this dream more because it reminds me of the map, which I might draw later, of
a sort of fictional city, my dream city, that I know what it looks like) this
dream mostly revolves around me, Nick Lacosi, and Kyle, all playing this sort
of weird 3v3v3 game that has video game like qualities, but is played in the
real world (the real world of the dream). It had to do with this area of the
world, which in this dream world there are people, but the concept of "living
somewhere" isn't one that we find burdensome I guess, but there is a whole open
space which we basically use to play this game. We then choose our characters,
similar to a blind pick draft in LOL, and we spend turns fortifying and
otherwise arranging ourselves on this area. Well, in this first phase of the
game, when it is our turn, we all know that we are not taking this game as
seriously, as in, we are taking it seriously, but this game is not a serious
part of our lives, and we have not dedicated ourselves to this game in the same
way the other two teams had, and so after our first phase, we know that we are
not going to win, and that we should probably just withdraw, not out of safety
or honor or anything, but because we all know that the other team will easily
win and that there isn't much point in continuing. Now, I don't want to dwell
on the rules of this game, because, quite honestly, I don't really understand
them myself, and clearly the rules of it were not important to my dream self
understanding what was going on, so they are not important to try and write
down, at least, I don't feel that they are, so I don't really feel like making
much sense out of it. The only other thing I remember is that Evan was there
and he showed us, "hey, check out this character, he's so broken" and he
actually was the character, which was most similar to Vladimir from LOL, and he
showed us how he could dash, and attack, and use his three moves with very
little cooldown almost indefinitely, and he was dashing around basically saying
how fun it was, and how broken it was, and how is this balanced, and things
like that, and I remember thinking something like, "well, he is very weak when
he is not leveled and you haven't gotten to that strength yet" because he had
leveled up the character to max, and was abusing the powers of the character to
its fullest.

So after we had more or less decided to resign, I decide to make my way through
this area. Like I said, I had driven through the 635 dream version to get here,
and by the way 635 actually does go north south like I imagine everything
around my parents place to be, and so after arriving at this place from the
south, and exploring it a bit with Nick and Kyle, I get back in my car and go
through it further north, and I was on some objective for them (we hadn't
entirely given up, but we had resigned ourselves to our fate) but I remember
when I drove north I got to a sort of intersection that went down and curved
way up and to the left, and around that point I got lost, because I knew I was
not going to reach the destination this way, or something like that, and I
called Kyle and Nick, and they gave me shit for not even being able to drive to
where I wanted (I think they were waiting for me for something, I forget what)
and I returned their shit, but I knew that my shit didn't have the sort of ammo
that theirs did, as I was basically giving them shit for giving me shit, and
around then was the end of that dream.

I also remember another area, and this area is interesting because I remember
having dream Gym meets that were done here (long long after I should even be
dreaming about Gym meets), but this time it was repurposed in to what was I
think a sort of soliloquy show for children Kinley's age. Kinley was in this
performance, and the stir and bustle of everyone in the area was like that of
that dance recital of Kinley's that I went to that one time, with mom and dad
and Kyle and Evan and everyone there, but I don't remember much of any details
besides the dream. I do remember two details. One was the location. This entire
thing was shaped like a box, and towards the stage area was the lowest area,
then it came up along like the stands to the area, and at the top of that area
was there was a walking area, so not at all unlike what you would imagine that
should be like. The only really peculiar thing was that the stage area was
divided into two sections by a wall, and this wall came up only about halfway
between the two stage areas, so the left side was a practice area and the right
side was the actual stage, and there was a gap in this dividing wall and the
back wall for the little actors and actresses to walk between, and if you were
on the top area in the middle along the same line as the dividing wall, you
could see both stages. The practice stage didn't have as many seats, and didn't
raise up as high, and I seem to remember it was lit way better as the actual
stage area had more "dramatic stage lighting". So that was that.

The other thing I remember about this whole thing, which isn't really worth
taking note of in the dream, but I remember a person, female, who was exactly
like the person I remember from Kinley's irl stage production. The memory I
have of her is that she empathized with her child, who was making a fuss when
she tried to put her hair all tight into a bun and put her in these absurd
clothes and etc, and she put words into her fussing child like "I am actually
three, I'm three and you're making me do this." She said this to us as she was
explaining her difficulty, and her empathy, with the situation, which is an
interesting sort of psychological thing going on.

So yeah, I wanted to get these dreams out, because they are both wholly
forgettable, and I already just in the thirty minutes after waking forgot a lot
of details, as I know if I remembered these dreams better I could have filled
an entire article as I have in the past, but right now I don't want to speak of
dreams anymore but I want to read some Shakespeare, so I am going to do that,
and I am certain I will come back to write some more. I just got the idea that
my two Christians will be similar in their faith as my Grandfather and
Grandmother, in that they are together, and they both are Christian, but they
have very different views of Christianity, but they share their love in spite
of that. I have also thought of the two athiests to be lovers like that as
well. I want to interview all of them later, but right now I don't feel like I
have quite the inspiration or interest to do that, it would feel more like a
chore than discovery, so I will take a break, have a bit of my day, and come
back to that later.

So I'm back, now with coffee, so we will so how this writing thing turns out
now that I have some stimulant to fuel me. So let's start with something of an
idea I have for a story.

So this is the same idea I've had for a long time, I don't know why I said it
as if it is a new story. However, I like this idea because it is a new one in
the context of the story. So I want this to be a group of five friends, two
couples and a single guy. The couples will be a christian couple and an athiest
couple, and then a single dude. Now, the story will be surrounding the group of
four, the two couples, who decide to go on a remote getaway to an old hermitage
from really old times, like old. You get it. Old. And this is the hermatiage of
my hermit that I have wrote about before.

So the reason that these two couples are going on this get away is to get away
from the death of their fifth friend, Brett. The exact nature of Brett's death,
I don't really know. If I wanted to make this autobiographical, I would say
Brett died due to a stroke of the brain, that caused first numbness in his left
arm, and he didn't seek help soon enough, so he died. I kind of like this
because it is familiar, but at the same time it's like, anyone who might read
this would say "Oh, I see, so this Brett is actually you, I see what you are
doing." In fact, I only call him Brett now just because I want it to be clear
that this character is the one that most represents me, and I want him to be
dead, so that this story is indeed an autobiographical account.

I have also come up with four names for my characters, Peter, Madison, Ann, and
Gene. However, I really hate this because these characters I want to be
entirely fictional, so naming them after people I am so intimately familiar
would be wrong. Also, I don't think the roles that these people irl fit into my
life irl are the roles I want them to fit in the story, they just don't match
up like that I don't think. So Nix that idea. I want to start with my interview
of Dmitri. Now I don't like Dmitri because he is too close to the name of the
character in a Brothers Karamazov, actually identiacally so, so I like the idea
of something Russian sounding, but americanized. What would be the american
version of Dmitiri? Non-biblically speaking. David is what comes to mind, but I
don't want that to be biblical. Michael also comes to mind, but that is also
biblical. So how about Devin. That's closer to what I want. It's a little too
close to devil though for my liking, so I don't like that as much. How about
Derek. I like Derek. But at the same time I don't, it's a little harsh, and I
want his personality to be harsh but not his name. There needs to be an "l" in
there. But not Darrell. Damien. That's the best I have come up with so far.
Damien. But the group calls him "Mani". So I have my character named Damien,
nicknamed Mani. I like that.

Okay, now how about his girlfriend. She has to have a name like Katerina. But I
don't like Katarina exactly, although I like the fact that it has a lot of
syllables. Let's talk about her for a bit. Let me interview her. So, what do
you do?

I don't know what she does. She is an organizer, and event planner. Similar to
Lacey irl. For hospitals. She enjoys helping those that can't help themselves.
How did you grow up? She never knew her father. She likes Damien, and she is
devoted to him. She is very unpromiscuous. She wears modest clothing, never
revealling herself, but still. She is the Kim from my dreams. Kimberly is her
name. But in her group of friend everyone calls her Kimber. I don't like Kim
because that is Jason's mother, and I don't want to tie that aspect into this
story, but I know a Kim, and I like for her to represent my dream version of
her, so Kimber I think fits with the theme here.

I like this discovery process of names, it's doing it for me. Damien and
Kimberly, or Mani and Kimber, are two. Who are the others.

Well, we know Brett, that one is not changing. How about the other two. I
actually really like Ann for the female of that side, as she represents that
for me.

How about Grant for the other one? I don't like that name, even though Grant
irl fits the character of this person very well. Perhaps its because of that
that I don't want to name him Grant. I don't want him to be associated with
Grant. You see, I don't want to write about Grant, I want to write about this
fictionaly character, who has a personality similar to Grant's but is entirely
his own person. What is his name? His name is simple, one or two syllables. Not
something complicated. I don't think I should name my other character Ann for
the same reason I shouldn't name this one Grant. However, I want each of their
names to be simple. So for this character, let's just start with Grant and
start mophing it with Timothy, and go from there. Grant Trotter, Timothy
Hoffman. Grantothy. Timant. Tigothy. Prant. Frant. This character is the
opposite of Damien. So what is the sort of opposite of Damien philologically?
"Dah" is a sort of hard sound, so a softer sound would be something like
Lyganov. Very russian. Indeed, I like the duality of Russian, that is something
that is missing in English very sorely. Soft and hard, voiced and non-voiced,
english doesn't have these things. It makes coming up with names more difficult
than it should be. Lyse. I like Lyse. That might be it. Is that the nickname or
is that the full name? Lyse. Lyse. I like that. Lyse.

So Lyse is newlywed to this woman. I think they are newlywed anyway. Actually,
I think they are just dating. Perhaps they are engaged. Newly engaged. That
might be better. Lyse is struggling with his Christianity. In fact, this whole
notion of flat earth, and Lyse coming to accept it, I think creates a rift
between Lyse and his girlfriend, whose name is not coming to me at the moment,
that they end up breaking up. So who would be the girlfriend of Lyse. This
girlfriend would also be a sort of mirror of Kimberly. Or Kimbo, as they
sometimes call her, although she doesn't like that. And she really doesn't like
Kim, legitimately doesn't like Kim, although she secrectly likes Kimbo, but she
likes it because she like to tease people for calling her that, that weird
pardoxical liking of something like that. So the foil to Kimbo, or Kimberly,
would be a harsh name. Indeed, this character is quite the hypocrite. She could
have a very proper name like Margeret, although that name isn't right. I like
Maggie. Maggie is pretty close to the mark, although the name Maggie doesn't
quite pull up the image I want.

This girl, she is the sort that wears old timey clothing in order to break the
norms of fashion, and she wears it always in a very modern way, in a way that
would appall the people who wore such clothing when it was fashionable.
Actually, appall is not the right word, it would be wholy unfashionable to
those who would have worn it in their time. She would wear it in such a way to
display her old-fashioned-ness, but ironically, it would be out of fashion for
those who wore it when it was in fashion. Clothes that her grandmother might
have worn, but worn in a way that her Grandmother would not have found
fashionable in her time. So instead they are clothes that she has the
perception that her Grandmother might have worn, but if she ever asked her
Grandmother what she thought of the clothing, the grandmother would say that it
was just off in a way to make it peculiar. So in this way, she should wear old
fashioned clothes, but in a modern way, and in a similar way, her name should
be somewhat old fashioned, but in a modern way. Similar to how Everly is an
old-fashioned sounding name but is used for my now four year old niece. Now, of
course, I don't want to use the word Everly, as I don't want this character to
be about my niece, so instead I need to come up with a different old fashioned
name, but put a modern spin on it.

So beatrix is an old fashioned name. How could one put a modern spin on
Beatrix? How about Beet? That is too obscure and made up. I am trying to thing
of some variation of Beatrix that is a mirror to Kimberly. Bee and Ki. Beatya,
a very Russian sounding name. Витя. I like that, transliteratted to Veetya. But
that is again too Russian, but I like where this is going. How about Beetrix?
That is too close to Beatrix, and people would wonder why she was not named
Beatrix. So how about Veatya? I keep coming back to the Russian я ending, which
makes the name much too Russian. So lets stray from that and think of some
american names. Racheal. I actually really like Racheal, and I know that it is
a biblical name, but not near as recognizable as Micheal or David were. Rachey
could be her nickname. Something like that. I like Racheal though. I'm not sure
how to spell that. But Racheal is good. About as good as it is going to get.
Lyse and Racheal. I don't like Racheal entiely, I need the modern spin on it.
Maybe she likes to say it as RuSHELL with the emphasis on the ending, and
that's her mordern spin on it. I like Shelly as her nickname. Racheall and
Shelly, girlfriend of Lyse. And Damien and Kimberly. I like these names. They
are the best I can come up with for now.

Names are hard man, and I haven't even come up with surnames. I will not give
these characters surnames until I have written more about them.

I will get more coffee.

Okay, I'm back and I have more coffee.

So now I want to start to interview my characters. I will start with Damien, or
Mani or Mitee as his girlfriend might call him.

So Damien, tell me a bit about your upbringing?

Yeah, sure, so I was born in what you would call not the best of circumstances,
but not the worst of circumstances either.

Okay, tell me about your parents first then.

At this, Damien gave a sort of scoff, as though the topic of his parents was
not one that he wanted to touch upon. "Well, I'll tell you about my parents,
although I don't really like either of them. I grew up as most boys do, going
to school and getting good grades. I would get in trouble in school for the
most silly things, like making a ruccus in the back with the other boys, and
being disrupted in class, but being sent to the principles office only made him
(I have transition to describing him, as I don't think Damien would have the
sort of self-awareness to answer how I want) would only make him more bitter of
the rules set forth by the school. He got good marks on all his grades,
espically those he didn't consider "stupid" but on the subjects he didn't like,
he would get poorer grades, not because he couldn't learn the material, but
because he had no interest in, as he might put it, "Learning something so
stupid as the date that Joan of Arc was burned at the stake." He would get
reprimanded by this from his parents, and at this he would continue to stay his
ground that those things were stupid, but he would begin to put effort into
them not because he felt is was the right thing to do or because he began to
see any value in them, rather he put effort into them because putting effort
into those things was less burden on his life than the grief he would get from
his parents of the poor marks he would get, so he would put only as much effort
as needed into those subject to get better marks, and nothing more. He would
even go so far as to intentionally put less effort into those subjects even
when he started to find them at least midly interesting, perhaps out of spite
of his parents or because he wanted his grades to reflect not his abilities,
because his abilities he knew in himself to be above that of all of his peers,
but because he wanted at least at some subconcious level for his grades to
represent his interest in certain subjects. So he recieved high marks in the
maths and the sciences, as he enjoyed those subjects, but intenionally would
get lower marks in the historys and the "softer studies" as he might have
called them.

His parents were both devout Christian's but devout in all the wrong ways. They
would pray at every meal, and when Damien would inquire about the prayers,
asking why it was neccesary to thank God for the food when it clearly came from
the supermarket, his parents would say something as silly as "because
everything comes from god and if we don't thank him for it he might become
angry, and we don't want God to be angry at us". Indeed, his parents might not
have said something as ridiclous as this, but that was certainly the sort of
motivation that they had for their Chirstianity. When Damien would inquire
about the reason for dressing up and going to church on Sunday, his parents
would say, "Becaus we have to give god our best on his day." and when Damien
might ask why Sunday in particular was "God's day" his parents would say
"Because God made Sunday his day in the bible, so that's the way it is." and
dismiss Damien's further points, reckoning that he was a simple child and that
maybe when he was older he would stop asking such childly questions.

And all these things, the blessing of the food, the going to church, and all of
the other things Damien had to do growing up, he would always resist them, but
never to the point of angering his parents, because they were pretty well off,
and angering his parents in such a way he was at least wise enough to realize,
even if he did not explictly realize it, he must have realized internally that
angering his parents in this way would give no benefit to him, and he was
better off appeasing them for things like Christmas and Easter and Sunday
church, and ignoring them completely, so that he could busy himself with other
things.

In fact, on the church bulliten, he would write math problems down during the
sermons, and solve them, and he would work out physics problems with the little
pencils that the church offers there for offering, and he would use those tools
to put together little puzzles to occupy his brain while the pastor would speak
of this or that or something else, and in so doing he would occupy himself
with things he enjoyed, and not bother his parents with how silly this whole
thing was.

When Damien went off to college, his natural course of action was in physics,
and his parents enjoyed this about him and would say things between themselves
like "maybe his study of physics will lead him to see that science can't
explain God, and in so doing he will come to see God in his own time." Indeed,
both of Damien's parents were worried about his salvation, and they felt that
he needed more time in school. Any time Damien would call and visit his
parents, he would like about an extracurricular bible study he was attending to
his parents, just because he knew it would ease there mind about his salvation,
when in reality he was going to an athiest meeting, where they would talk about
the ridiculuosness of Christianity, and all of the logical fallacies of the
bible, and he would use his experience in those meetings to fabricate the dual
of what a Christian bible study would be like, and would tell his parents about
that. And he never felt bad about lying to his parents about it, "Indeed, if
there really is no Hell, and I firmly believe that there is not, why shouldn't
I lie to my parents? It's easier for me in this world, and it won't make any
difference when I'm dead, so I will lie about it."

Damien first met Kimberly in one of his introductory physics classes. He saw
her sitting there taking notes on it very studiously as he sat in the back with
his laptop occupying himself with other things. Even undergraduate work came
easily to Damien, and he was glad at the opportunity to skip his classes
without demerit. In fact, he would many times make a game of it and skip as
many lectures as he could just to see how many he could skip and still get good
grades, and to his pleasue he realized that he could skip quite a few, and
indeed when it came to these mandatory introductory courses which he dreaded,
he could skip nearly all of them and still make satisfactory marks, so he would
do so and focus himself on other things.

Actually, my history is incorrect I think. Indeed, Damien had not met Kimberly
at all during his undergraduate time, and by the time he had graduated, he had
already been accepted into the graduate physics program at another university,
and he acquired a position as Teachers Assistant there. And at this, he was
grateful for the opportunity to help pay for his tutition with work there, but
now he was required not only to attend his graduate lectures (which now he
graciously attended because, as he put it, "it's like they finally recognize
that I want to learn something interesting") but now, to his distaste, he was
required by his professors to attend the introductory courses which he was
meant to provide grades for. And he hated this, but after speaking with his
professors on it, they conceded that he would be allowed to bring his graduate
work in with him to the lectures to work on, and at this he would do so and
wholly ignore (or obtain the lecture through osmosis, as he so put it) the
lectures, and work on his studies through there.

And it was in one of these classes, as teachers assistent, that he first came
across Kimberly.

Now, all through this time, I have failed to talk of Damien's interest in the
other sex, and I think it is my own lack of interaction with the other sex that
I fail to understand these interactions. Because Damien to this point, I would
say, was quite the smooth talker when it came to women. He was the sort that
would come to a woman, and say all of the things that knew that they wanted to
hear from him, so that he could have sex with them, and then after having sex
with them, he would elect to go his own way with them.

In fact, now that I think on it, perhaps in undergraduate school, he did
actually attend the bible studies, but only sporadically, and when he did, he
would pretend to be an anguished soul, someone seeking salvation, and
constantly at odds with the nature of God and of the universe. In this attitude
he began to notice that the women loved this sort of anguish in him, and he
would use this to speak to them. He did not call himself a pick up artist in
this way, but he loved toying with the women in that area who he knew to be
"good studious Christians" because he knew that they could surrender themselves
to him, but as soon as they did, and he got the pleasure from them that he
wanted, he would move on about himself. He would never wholly reject them, as
he knew if he was rude to them after he would have sex with them, word would
get around that he was an asshole and a douche, and he didn't want to be
labeled as such, but after he was done with them, he would discard them by
proclaiming that he was busy with his studies, and he would lie about not
getting good marks, and needing to study more, and he would constantly go over
things like this, saying thing to make them want to seperate themselves from
him. They would surrender themselves at first, but he would then make himself
unattractive to them. His fake anguished soul would become all to clear to
these women, but not so clear that they saw through his disguise, but only
clear enough to the point that they would realize that this is not the sort of
man you take home to meet your father, and he would seperate himself more and
more from them, until they would be the ones to break it off with him. And when
they did, he would pretend as though he were still anguishing over it, feigning
to be a tortured soul but trying to come to terms with that, and saying that he
understood that they each needed to find their own path in the ways of the
Lord. And all of these things would be wholly fake to him, and real to her, and
he did these things to keep his reputation in these circles as an anguished
soul.

His favorite time, he noticed, was at the begginning of each semester, when new
freshmen girls who were suddenly placed into this new environment of college
would be looking for an anchor. He knew many of these girls would have had high
school boyfriends, and that these girls would be "trying long distance" for a
time after their highschool graduation with these boys, and he would make
conversation with them, and reach their souls. He would find each one like a
new challenge, like a code to be cracked, and he quite enjoyed making these
girls fall for him in their loneliness and wont for their long distance
boyfriend, this boyfriend who they were uncertain of and would have sparse
communication with. He much enjoyed, at least for some time, cracking these
girls, and getting to them, and whole spoiling these long-distance
relationships. He found it like a game, and he would spend much of his time
amusing himself in this way, at least until he acheived his end, and then he
would grow bored of it, and continue back to his other puzzles and games that
amused him.

However, coming to graduate school, he decided that the time for those games
was over, at least for the time. He would still look back on them with
fondness, but he decided that he wanted to come to a girl who was not Christian
and that he could have a true intellectual conversation with as an equal.

And so it came by chance, as he was grading papers, he would come across this
Kimberly. On a certain one, he began to grade it, and as he did, he thought
with contempt how horrible it was that so many people could fail so
maginificently at introductory physics. And as he was grading such a paper,
marking it with a judicious red ink as he felt that his obligations as a TA
were a complete waste of time in light of what he could be studying, he saw at
the bottom of it there were simply 10 digits. Now, as he looked back, and saw
that this particular homework assignment was very neatly written, and that the
mathematics of it was so well spelled out that it could have only been made by
someone who had quite an unintutive notion of physics. This person would write
out all of the relevent formula's that were taught in class, formulas which
Damien knew to be true but would never bother to memorize, and at the top of
each problem were all of the relevent formulas, and then a very rote and
laborious transcription of those formualas into the forms they needed for that
problem. And as he graded this paper, he would find some mistakes in this
work, not mistakes in the transcription, as he would notice that the
transciptions were always correct strictly speaking, but those transciptions
would not match the nature of the problem at all, and instead would simply be
transcriptions of the formulas that she might have seen in class, and not
having an understanding of the principles of physics, but instead having a
strong ability to listen and memorize, she would apply the wrong transcription
exactly in the precise way that made the answer very precisely wrong. As he
looked back over his notes of this work, after seeing the ten digits, and
noticing the name of Kimberly on the top, he decided to go back through and
give more points off for her partially correct answers. This gave him a similar
pleasue to the pleasure he would find at seducing the Christian women, and he
elected that he would not call the ten digit number, but instead let her come
to him if she truly wanted to understand physics.

And sure enough, after he did this, know that it was indeed wrong, but always
justifying himself with that same statement, "if there is no devil then I
might as well act as one even if it is for my own amusement" after he had done
this, this Kimberly came to his office with that very same paper, and asked why
it was so harshly graded. Indeed, as before he would mark her off for her
partially correct answers, but this one was marked exceptionally harshly, and
she wanted to come to him to understand why. And so, to his amusement, he began
to talk to her in this way, talking down to her, telling her of all the wrong
things that were on it, and of all the ways it should have been write. "Indeed,
it is in my notes on the paper what exactly is wrong, what more could you want
of me?" and at this she would say, "I want to understand, what is it I don't
understand?" and he would say, "You see, you have a habit of writing formulas
and deriving equations in a very rote way, instead you should start with what
you think should be the way of the soulution based on your intution of the
principles, and working backwards you should arrive at the original formulas,
using the formualas to verify your intution, or rather, to forge and strengthen
your intutition." Much to Damien's surprise, he gave her a great lecture on
the white board there, going over the very basics of physics with her in the
most interesting of ways. And Damien found in himself something which he hadn't
been able to find before. After going over the principles, and going over it in
many different ways, to try and see if she would understand, she would ask him
more questions, questions which indicated to him that she wasn't understanding
fully what she was saying, and he would constantly have to remind her "No no,
this is not something you can memorize, it is something you have to understand,
let me see if I can explain in a different way," and he would try and imagine a
different way to explain to her, first using imagery and geometry, then using
philosophy and rigor, and using every analogy and story and thought experiment
that he could conjure up, because he could tell that this girl wanted to
understand, but had never been taught how to understand, and understanding had
come to Damien naturally, and in trying to teach this girl how to understand,
he had to go through the process of understanding which he blazed through in
his youth, and in re imagining this, he had to go through a process in a way
that he had never had to struggle with, but he could see this girl struggling
with it, and most of the time when he saw this, when he saw people struggling,
he would simply label them in his head as "unintelligent" but he saw that this
girl was very much not unintelligent, but was instead intellgent on a very
different spectrum than in the intellegence that he had, and he wanted to helf
he see the intellegence and the process which he would have gone through if he
were unintelligent, and in this way Damien could see that she genuinely wanted
to learn from him, and to tap into his potential. Damien found this profound in
a way, and before he realized it he had gone through this one howework, which
had only three simple problems, all problems which were based on one
fundamental principle of physics that to him he found so rudimentary, but he
finally understood the struggle of it through this girl, this Kimberly. He
could finally understand the struggle. He knew the struggle, but he had never
witnessed it in such an innocent way as this girl. And before he realized, he
had spent over an hour and a half trying to answer these girls questions,
because she had interesting questions, on this one simple principle, and when
they were done, she asked him if she had seen her number at the bottom of the
paper, and Damien said that he had, but that he doesn't date students. At this
she said "Okay, I understand" and left the room, but this had a profound effect
on Damien, and he noticed that when he got back to his graduate studies, and
went back to the problem he was working on before she came into his office,
when he came back to his "more interesting" work, the sort of work when people
would ask him "what are you working on" he would say, almost taking pride in
his pompousness "physics stuff that has so much math it would bore you" so as
to seperate those who asked the question and ostracize them (Damien enjoyed
ostracizing people in this way) he found that he was able to approach his "high
level" problems from a different angle, from an angle that would not have
occured to him before.

And so, this Kimberly continued to come to Damien's office, and Damien would
continue to grow more and more fond of her as the days went on. However, I do
want to note that, while he did grow fond of this Kimberly, he always thought
of her on a different level then himself. Indeed, Damien thought of her as a
tool, to be used, and he never truely would open himself up to her. Something
he might say to himself, when they began dating a few months later, after she
had passed his class and she was no longer his student, something he might say
to himself but not to her and not even to his friends, would be, "I date her
and I have interest in her for my own benefit, and the fact that she seems to
benefit from it to is only a happy coincidence." Indeed, let it be known that
while they dated, many times he would grow wearisome and abusive towards her,
not neccesarily in a physical way, but in the same way that he would make
himself distant from the Christian girls during his undergraduate years, he
would make himself distant from Kimberly, and while he would sometimes see the
great benefit of explaining her undergraduate studies in the topics that he
didn't understand, he would also find such a thing to be a chore at other
times. "Why should I help her with her Chemistry homework if it doesn't help me
with my studies" would be something he would say, and at times he would shrug
her off when he felt that she was being to needy. However, and this is
something that I also want to make clear, she would not put up with his shit
either, and when she felt that Damien was getting into this sort of mood, she
would distance herself from him as well. This gave Damien a great perplexity,
and indeed, whether he explictly realized it or not, was the sole reason that
they were able to continue to date.

However, these things have more to do with Kimberly than they do with Damien,
and I only mention them to paint more clearly Damien's perception of his
relationship with Kimberly. I want it to be clear that he was not "converted"
or anything of that sort by his relationship with Kimberly, merely I want to
impress upon the reader that this relationship was simply a rather remarkable
one that fit into Damien's view of relationships in a quite remarkable way, in
the sense that this was the sort of relationship that actually lasted in his
selfish and self-centered view of the world, and the only sort of relationship
that could have lasted for that time.

That I think is enough on Damien for now. I think I have quite discovered
Damien to my liking, and I like how his relationship with both women and with
Kimberly has evolved. I am not sure who I would like to discover next, but that
is not for me to decide at this time. I have done quite enough discovering, and
I think it is time for me to wind down a bit and read some.

Indeed, coffee is quite a great drug for these endeavors, and I dare say that
it is quite the stimulant for this sort of thought. I would like, at some
point, to experiment with loose leaf tobacco, and to smoke that to my liking
and see in what way I can enjoy that perhaps at first on its own and then later
in combination with the coffee, and see what sort of effects that has on my
creativity and my imagination. I am cautiously optimistic about the effects it
might have as such, and look forward to seeing what it may be.

I may write more today, but most likely not. If I do write, it will most
certianly not be anything about discovery, but instead about what I come to
read. I must be very careful with coffee, and confine myself to only indulging
in it sparingly. In fact, I think every weekend might be too often, as this
does have a great effect on my mind right now, and I can see how, if
over-indulged, one can grow quite a depenance on it, and I certainly don't want
that. I shall see, and take the utmost care in with this substance.


