# 20180808
So last night I had a couple of dreams. I know I had more than that, I had many
small dreams last night but I remember one of them very well, and I remember
another one just pretty well.

So the first dream I remember actually took place in my apartment. It was
mostly like my apartment, everything was nearly exactly the same as it is.
However, as you will see, there will be details later that are a little
strange.

So the first thing I remember in this dream is hearing someone come to my door.
This someone, he was an old man, probably one of those men that is actually in
his 50s but you would swear he is in his 80s based on how he looks, and he had
a child with him. I remember somehow knowing that he was coming up to my door,
maybe I heard commotion outside (and maybe I heard commotion outside irl too, I
don't know) but I decdided to check what was going on through the peep hole. I
was sleeping in the dream, so I sort of crawled over to my door, and there was
a peep hole about a foot off the ground that was perfect for viewing. I
remember looking through the peephole, and getting a good view of his child.
The child was maybe four years old, and rather well behaved. I remember seeing
the child, and I remember, as I was looking through the peephole, the old man
beckoned to the child, "Go ahead, open the door, it's okay." So at this point,
I remember wondering about the intent of a man like this wanting to open my
door. I thought, "Surely he is just exercising his right to be a free man, what
a fool" or something like that, and the whole thing seemed to me to be a sort
of joke almost. After some back and forth, the child opened the door, and I was
right there, waiting for the door to open, to tell this man off right away. I
was also naked (I was wearing underwear irl) in a sort of "this is my apartment
so I can be naked so fuck off" sort of way, and before they could really say
anything I stood there and asked, "well what do you want," and when he started
to stumble upon himself, and I could tell he was talking about me being naked
and such, I shut the door on him. I thought, "What a despicable man, intruding
on me just because with no real reason, having his child open the door without
knocking." I then went back to lay down, but as I lay there I started to become
very scared, and I locked and deadbolted the door (both of those things exist
on my door) and lay back down. As I lay there, similar to the way I knew that
the old man and the child were outside, I began to notice outside that there
were many people congregating outside my room. In particular, there was a lady
there, and an apartment enforcer. That is, in addition to the old man and the
child, who started gathering these people. I was getting very cautious. Well, I
heard the old man attempt to open my door, but the deadbolt stopped him, so
then I heard him try and pick the lock, and I thought, "it's a good thing I
latched the deadbolt as well." And when he picked the lock, and the door still
wouldn't open, the lady said something like, "You can't hide in there forever,
we'll get to you eventually, it would be better if you just opened the door for
us." So I opened the door, quite angrily, and said something like, "What the
hell do you guys want?" At this, the lady started spewing off things, telling
me about how I'm a bad tenant, how I make a lot of noise, she started accusing
me of indecent exposure and public masterbation, she accused me of not keeping
my room up to apartment code, and she accused me of smoking marijuana in the
apartment. She then started to say, "also, the way you sleep on the floor, when
you turn, you make noise. You shouldn't sleep on the floor, that's an old idea
you had, and it's not relevent to you anymore. You did it so that you could be
versitile, but now you sleep in the same room in the same place everyday, and
you are no more versitile then you have been in the past. It's pointless, and
for your own good you should sleep in a bed." To that I said, "I don't even own
a bed, and I don't intend to buy one," to which she scoffed at me. I was about
ready to close the door on this lady, when the man, the man who is a curator of
the apartment complex, (all of these people are dream versions of people, they
are not people I know) he interjected himself and said, "Actually, she has a
point, we have been getting numerous complaints and you are going to have to
sleep in a bed now, along with fixing the other things she has talked about."
When he was saying these things, I looked back at my counter and saw my jar of
marijuana that I have still, my "gateway to hell" and as he was talking, as
stealthily and nonchelontly as I could I took it and grabbed it and held it
behind the door frame out of view. When he finish, I said, "Okay, I'll work on
it." And I was about ready to close the door on him when he said, "Is that a
subpenea there? Did we send that to you?" and when I looked, on the counter
near where the marijuana was, was a slip of paper. It was a single slip that I
had kept from the apartment, and the rest I threw away, but I still had that
single piece for whatever reason. As I walked over to grab it, I still had the
marijuana in my hand, so I stealthily walked over and grabbed the paper as I
slipped the marijuana into my desk (where it is IRL) and I showed him the
piece of paper, and said, "Is this what you're talking about? I don't know what
this is." (And if I am being totally honest, I don't know what a subpeana or an
affidavit is irl, I will have to look those terms up now) And he said, "we have
subpeanaed you, you can't ignore that, you have to deal with it." Around this
point is near where the dream ended. I think I remember saying something like,
"Well, I don't have a clue how to deal with a subpeana, so it's just going to
sit here, because I'd rather not concern myself with such nonsense." And he
kept insisting that I couldn't just ignore it. About there is where the dream
ended.

I am feeling fairly uninspired to write the other dream. It was at the library,
the dream version of the library, with all of the multiple floors and balconies
and stairways and all of that goodness, but this was just on the first floor,
and I remember going to the back counter to information services, and asking
about something, some book maybe that I had on hold or something like that, and
I remember that she offered me two things, one statue for the low price of
$4500 and something else that was over 10 grand. I declined both offers, and
later, when I was talking with someone else about it, I remember saying, "I
mean, I was tempted because I know those things are usually way more than that,
but that was a lot of money." or something like that. That was about the extent
of that dream. Like I said, there is not much too it.

I know I had dreams before the apartment one, but I don't remember them, and I
know they were short.

I have taken a break here, I will write more when I feel so inspired.

So I am feeling a little more inspired now. Just a little. I am not sure what I
want to write about, but I know I want to write.

Actually, you know what, you know what grinds my gears. I don't know how the
adjectives decline when saying a statement such as "the sky is blue". Looking
at google translate, it seems to me that it will decline to the nominative, so
not at all, but when you talk about the future or the past, it seems to delcine
to either the plural dative, or the instrumental singular. The instrumental
singular makes the most since, but it doesn't make sense to me why. Why would
the adjective be in the nominative in the present tense, but in the
instrumental in the past or future tense? The instrumental usually asks the
question, "With what" so for instance if I painted the wall with blue, it would
make since to me that it should be in the instrumental, but that's not what I'm
saying, I'm just saying the wall was blue, or the wall will be blue, and for
some reason the insturmental (or plural dative which makes no sense) is being
used to describe that case. I don't understand.

Anyway, that will be something to ask Liel the next time her and I meet.

I am going to go to my story now. Enough of this.
