# 20180811
So where to begin.

I suppose we will begin at the begining, that is, the beginning of the day. Or
rather, last night. Last night I went to bed late, and woke up on time, but
stayed in bed late. I had a dream. This dream I woke up from, and immediately
realized to myself, "I have an oedipus complex." It is strong in me as well.
Like, really strong. It needs to be combated. Essentially, all I remember about
the dream is falling into the seductive arms of my mother. It was my mother,
the image of her was painfully clear in the dream, and I remember we got close,
and we started to hug, and we started to kiss, but it was dream kissing so it
was a different sort of feeling. But we were doing that, and we were standing,
and I started removing her shirt, and she mine, and I remember her brests
pressing against me, her naked breasts. It was both vivid and abstract at the
same time. It wasn't like the feeling of sex, or of intamacy really, but it was
vivid. It was not vivid in the sense that I remember details of it, but it was
vivid in the sense that I remember the actions and the motives. I woke up at
that point. I must remark that I immedietly checked myself, and I was not
hard. So this was not a sort of wet dream infused sort of vision.

Oh, my Jocista. What evils have you wrought for me? To what do I owe this
preconceived curse?

It manifested itself later in the day. My project, I have finished my first
draft a few days ago. If you go back and look at my commit messages, you will
see a message that says "It's ALIVE!!!" or something like that, and that is the
first time that my project has taken source data, placed it into an object
framework, and from that object framework, created new source data that has a
tags file that allows for navigation. It is very much alive. But now I am to
the point where I have wrought my frankenstein monster, Prometheous have given
me fire, and now I have to tame the fire, and weild it into something taht is
managable. All of my classes and methods are everywhere, and there is a lot of
refactoring that needs to be done. My skeleton, my flesh, is there, and now it
is time to harness it and sharpen it into a living mature being. It is an
infant that need restructuring. My infant though, the infant of my womb. I want
it to have a life of it's own. It will get there, but I need to train it, I
need to father it.

That's the point I am at. Maybe this notion is due to my lack of fatherhood. I
am resentful of my father, so the fatherly aspects in me are strongly
repressed, which is always why I have resistance to working hard. That is a
trait in my father, and I repress those aspects of myself. That has to be it,
or something like that.

So today, I had a few problems. One, I feel insecure about my progress in the
Russian language. I have started analyzing a short story by I don't remember
her name and don't feel like breaking my flow to go look it up, but I have
analyze a childrens story by her, and I have gotten through something like
we'll say 7 sentences in the 6 or so hours I have spent this week on learning
Russian, and those six hours (I just used sex as a freudian slip, that's
somehow interesting) have been spent on these sentences, and analyzing them,
and analyzing the cases, and such, and I don't really have material for Liel.
So of course, what is my instinct in this sort of situation? My instinct is to
go on to reddit and start browsing porn. I literaly had, (Liel has since
canceled our meeting today, which I think is wise, she mentioned her baby
stirring, which whatever, it works for me) at the time, something like four
hours to come up with some material to go over tonight, but instead of doing
that, or instead of continuing to refactor my child, my child that needs my
attention and cries to me, instead of either of those things I went on to
reddit and started edging myself to various images. I would stroke myself, and
then get to a point where I would become weary of orgasm (which takes maybe a
half dozen good strokes at this point at most) and I would let my fully erect
penis just hang there in its fullness of being, and when it would die down a
little, I would move on to the next and do the same.

I ended up on a subreddit called "/r/gonewild" which is essentially a subreddit
intended for the purpose of shareing ameteur nudes of yourself to others. I was
very tempted to simply join in and post a picture of myself, but I noticed that
all of the top posts were of women, and then when I investigated further, I
found that there were posts of men, but they were burried in the downvotes and
would never get to the top of "Hot" or whatever the main page of a subreddit
is. Well anyway, I was browsing this, and I landed upon a chat room, a chatroom
where anyone in the room is allowed to place there cam up, and they just chat
about things. It took me a bit, because that room still uses flash (I didn't
even realize flash was still a thing in modern browsers, but apparently it is)
so after I spent a good five minutes deliberating over exactly how to install
flash, it's not that hard, I just spent a few minutes navigating to the site a
few times on various browsers to see if it was up and such, I finally was able
to join the chatroom, see the people, and see the chat. Of course, the chat was
nothing special. There were a few cams of chicks, but all the chick cams were
clothed, and there were mostly cams of dudes jerking it, which is to be
expected, but still, that was what I anticipated. THere was one cam of a girl
that was fat as fuck, like, really fat, and she was of course naked, but all of
the girls who were even mildly attractive were rather conservative in their
wear. Anyway, I ended up edging myself here. And at this point, I must mention
a couple things. One, I was certainly not edging to the photos like I have with
porn in the past. It wasn't like, "these photos are turning me on" it was more
like, "there is a pathway in my brain that associates browsing photos like this
with jerking off. THat combined with the fact that I haven't orgasmed in weeks
and the fact that I am edging myself to begin with, is making it difficult for
me to contain myself." ON this chat room, you could make certain cams full
screen. So I would continue to edge myself in this way, and I remember thinking
in my head, "well, I suppose I should make some of the cams full screen and see
if any of these girls seem at least interesting." And for the most part the
girls were just sort of sitting there, chatting or whatever, just chilling.
Well, there was one chick who I would say was the clear winner as far as
hotness goes, and I made her screen fullscreen, and it just so happened (and I
do believe it really was a sort of coincidence, at least, in my conscious mind
it was because after it happened I sort of chuckled at the screen that I had
made full screen) that I edged myself to the point of no return. And once I hit
that point of no return, I leaned back a bit, almost in denial of what was
about to happen, saying to myself "Sexual functions are just like any other
functions of the body and can be controlled" but no amount of deep breathing
and dissassociation was going to stop it, and I let out first a really large
shot, followed by the immediate "Well shit, this is happening, contain it now"
of many more shots after that. Forturnately, I had a rag in my hand, because I
was using it to wipe off the precum (and that's the justification I had for
this whole thing, "I need to get the precum out of my system") so I covered
myself with the rag to catch the ejactulate, and when it was over, I sort of
just sat there.

The orgasm itself wasn't particularly strong. When I have masterbated in the
past, especially the maybe dozon or so times that I will edge like that, I
will...

Okay, I must write about this now. I am getting the urge to masterbate again.
Here is the thing. I don't know if it is wise to do so or not. I think no.
Okay, so it's very easy to say that, but I don't know where that comes from.
For what reason do I say no? Is it simply the no fap propaganda in me? I think
it is because I am writing about how the orgasm wasn't very good. And I think
to myself, "what a shame, the orgasm wasn't even very good, I should masterbate
again so that I can induce a much stronger orgasm." I think that is part of the
thought. Also, I think partly, it must have to do with something else. I'm not
sure. The compulsion is strong though. The compulsion to close this editor,
return to reddit, return to that chatroom, and "just see" what is going on, it
is strong. But now that i think about it, I have come up with another thing. I
could also have a compulsion to go to frys, and check the daily deals on my
email, and check that, and see what is for sale. I have been checking for a
good pair of headphones lately, and I am having the compulsion to close this
screen and do that as well.

Again, I think this has to do with the repressed desire to not be like my
father. Or rather, my subconscious is repressing the traits of my father that
are within me. I think, since my subconscious sees "Oh he is working, he is
being productive" the part of me that wants to repress that desire is beggining
to take it's hold. It's a strange feeling inside of me. I'm not sure what to do
with it, or about it.

Still, let me continue. Immediately upon having the orgasm, I closed all of the
windows and tabs (I just closed firefox, I make it sound like there was a whole
host of programs and materials up, but it was just a few tabs on firefox) and I
went outside, and I began to jog.

I think part of what it is, too, is the cells craving more of the orgasm. I
feel it in my body. My body feeling, the essence of my body, different then the
feelings you get in your nerves, but that sort of out of body feeling that you
can feel, it is eager for more. It is thirsty. It's one thing when you say,
"Okay, I have been masterbating for X weeks now, everyday for the most part,
and now I want to stop," and you stop, and the body reacts naturally to that.
It says, "Yeah, we have had a lot of that artificial levels of whatever lately,
and we're honestly a little sick of it, so we are totally cool if you do that"
but in this way, it now says, "Holy shit, we haven't had that feeling in such a
long time, and we have forgotten how good it feels. Give us more" I think that
is what I am feeling right now.

I want to try something. This is something I read one time on a Wim Hof
subreddit, how someone would do the breathing method, and would free type
during the breathe retentions. I should do that. I am going to do that now
actually.

I am in the dark. My finger tys are very tingly. Writing becmoes slow. I ma
writing in  a way that I have never experience before. I am seeing colers.
Colors that corespond to things. to the way i type thing s are becmoeing colrs.
I love this feeling. Green is the strongest color. I am loose. I am light. I am
egtting weary. I must get breathe again. Retention. It's over. Tying becames
fatster. I dont care about mistakes at all. Filling the dd with blood. It is. 

tying again. foot comenig loose. Fingerst ligt. single word sentencs. single
phrase come out. Nothing more. Thes wores are not my own. They ar enot mine.
They come out independently of the voice. The voice speeks them. I am ont these
words. Thes words are not me. They are sothing ales. They are the product of
something. of what. Of wath, I don't donw. What was that. It's lue. Its green.
struggle. release. inhale. tingle. intense. spne bent lefs.Turnig strungleel.
Right hard. spned bent very left.

Enter. Pressed Slow typingis strang. Mistakes are made. Many mistakes. Strang
with it this its. Curve down. Humble yorself. Prayer to that which we don't
understand . Name for this. Not fice. Fice is starng. Fice is not rpayer. Fice
is demon. Does demons. Read it. I must. It reveals nature . I know it
odesgreaen and blue release.

Opne eyes. what od I see. Verything lightnothing missing. Mistakes come out in
pure form. Open eyes. strong feeling.

Okay, so my next project is certainly doestoevskies "The possessed". I have
been making two excuses to postpone reading this. First, I have not gotten my
baby to it's full completion, and I want to be able to analyze this work. But
second, and perhaps more important, is that I have not compiled it in the way I
like. I do not think I want to read it from the novel. From the book. I want to
read it from teh tablet. I think. Well, I don't know really.

That was an interesting excersize. It is strong. It also reveals the nature of
death. It allows one to escape the burden of life. Breathe gives life, and lack
of breathe reveals the state of death. Our souls are not capable of
withstanding that sense of death for very long. It must be trained, it must be
exercized. I must become comfortable with death. This is something I must do
more often. The wimhof breathing method with freewriting. I love it. I must do
it more. It must be trained.

This will be my goals. Every day, I have these things that I want to do. Let's
make a sort of list.

During work
    Write for an hour
    Analyze Russian for an hour
After work
    Immediately do cleaning tasks. Fifteen minutes.
    Run a mile.
    Wim hof freewriting.
    Russian vocabulary practice. Twenty minutes.
    Eat.
    Read

The biggest thing that I am not quite prepared for at this moment is teh
Russian vocabulary practice.
