# 20180704 Dream of Kim in Seattle - Discovery of the hermit
So I woke up today thinking only about how much I didn't want to go to yoga. I
would so much rather sit here and describe my dream. So that's what I'm doing.

So this dream starts at the parking lot of this sort of crowded ocean location.
Or at least, I'm pretty sure it's the ocean, although thinking on it, the water
is much too still to be the ocean and it is probably a really big lake. If I
had to give a location for this whole thing, it would probably be the sister
city of my dream location of Seattle, so I suppose this is dream Portland. It
only makes logical sense. Anyway, I would like to spend a few words describing
the location. So as I said, this location is a massive lake, so massive that I
didn't even think to look out to the other side and see if it were possible to
swim across, and having woken up now, as I said, my first inclination was that
this was the ocean, but thinking about it, and thinking about exploring the
location in my mind, I know in my mind that if I were to get in a boat and
travel across it, I would certainly reach the other side, and I could go around
in a circle and go along the perimeter of this lake, so it is indeed a lake,
just a rather large one. That, and I know for certain that it is fresh water
rather than saltwater, and that the water is relatively still. So at the sort
of "popular entry point" to this lake is a parking lot, a rather small one for
the number of people that were here, but such things don't have to make sense
in this context. Somehow these people are all here, all of which are visiting,
and all of which somehow made it there without needing a spot to park. The
wonders of dream logic. From this parking lot, there is a sort of floating
bridge. If you can imagine the floating docks that you see at certain places,
that rise and fall with the tides, this place had many of these sort of
floating docks like this, but they were all connected in a wide web of piers
and bridges, all of which connected off of this one parking lot location. I
also do know, similarly to how I know that this body of water is a lake, that
there are other connecting locations for this dock network, and when I say
other connecting locations, I mean just one other, now that I think about it.
So this whole dock network, which is actually more solid than these floating
docks now that I think about it, has many different nodes and areas, some
covered, some not, all of which are different and unique in their own way, and
all of which are connected by these bridges in their own way. One can imagine a
children's playground, the sort of playground with a few circular areas, barred
off, with little children bridges between them, but all adult sized, and most
of them meant for adults to come to and lounge at and fish from. Because that
was what a lot of people were doing in the dream, not only the people who I
know in the dream, but just a lot of people, were fishing from these location
where it was appropaite. So the scene having been described, that is honestly
most of what the dream is. The dream starts with me parking my car in this
parking lot. I do want to mention that this is very much another dream I have
had of me living in my car. I was living in my car in this dream. And I don't
know when this first event happened, if it happened while I was in the car,
before the dream started, or if I farted a little too vulptuously in the dream
itself, but for a vast majority of the dream, perhaps even the entire dream, I
had come to this place for leisure, but the entire time I was looking for a
restroom, because in the dream, either before or during like I said I don't
remember, I had farted, but instead of a fart it had a little bit of poo in it,
and the entire dream I was attempting to find a restroom to take care of the
mess I made. Now, I am very much reminded of the time in Seattle that this did
indeed happen to me, but in Seattle when it happened, I immediatly (like a
thinking and reasoning human being would) checked myself, realized I had shit
in my pants (not a lot mind you, but enough that the term "I had shit in my
pants" is a reasonable thing to say), and took off the underwear I was wearing,
wiped myself breifly with the clean part of it so as not to spoil anything else
in the car, put on new underwear, and promptly threw the soiled underwear in
the nearest dumpster. I was a bit embarrassed by the event, but I knew that it
would all be okay, and that I was the only one who knew anything about the
whole thing, so I didn't concern myself with it. However, this dream was not
like this, for some reason I had determined that I needed to find some sort of
restroom in order to right this situation, and the entire dream was spent going
from person to person, being as cordial to them as I could while still finding
my way to a place where I could take care of my situation. So as I step onto
this pier web structure (because the whole point was to enjoy the scenes and
the view, which unfortanatly as you will find, I woke up before I could do
that) I step on and go along the first part of the bridge. At first it is
uncovered, but after a few dozen steps you go to a covered area, and this
covered area also has a wall at the back, towards the left side when you enter
it, and it comes to a sort of semi-circle area, which is wider than the bridge,
and could be said to be the first stopping point on this network of bridges. As
I get to the covered point, I had a sort of out of body dream experience, where
I took the point of view of a diver watching the fish take the bait, and I
overheard too people talking in this dream about thier fishing experience,
which is what prompted the out of body moment. I heard them talking about how
one of them caught a shark, and as he described it I could see the shark
grabbing thier bait and hooking on their line, but the shark had been eaten by
a whale, and as I heard him say that I could see the whale devour the shark in
a whole bite, the shark being one of those smaller sharks (although still quite
large) and the whale being of larger size then the shark, large enough for the
whole of the shark to fit in it's belly with minimal chewing, and mostly just
swallowing. Indeed, it would be appropiate to say that the whale swallowed the
shark. Having witnessed this scene from under the water first hand, my breif
out of body experience returned to my body, and I saw the fisherman holding his
pole with all his might, struggling to reel it in, with the tip of the pole
bending in every way, as he wrestled trying to pull the whale in, and he was
wholly dissapointed because he wanted to catch the shark, but he wanted to
salvage his pole now at this point, so he was forced to struggle to reel in the
whale. I then left these fisherman to their task, and continued along the way,
and as I continued along, I saw under this covered area and stopping at the
first sort of stopping point, were Kyle, Mom, and Evan, fishing in the center
with my Dad. The four of them all were there, but Kyle and Mom and Evan only
took notice of me and kept to whatever task they were doing (I don't think they
were all fishing, I know Kyle and Dad were, but I don't know about Mom and
Evan, and I am honesly not even sure thinking on it if they were a part of this
dream at all), but dad stopped me, and wanted to talk with me. What we talked
about, I don't remember, I only remember him holding his pole there, as he was
inbetween casts, and I sat down on the edge so as to conceal my uncomfortable
poop situation from my father as much as possible. After a somewhat breif
conversation that I was not listening to and only making the slightest replies
of, I mentioned that I wanted to go, and my dad let me go, but not before
making a remark to my smell, saying something like "you smell awful. What is
that?" to which I said I have no fucking clue and I got up and left, thinking
only about continuing on this path and looking past it towards a bathroom. And
after examination of the rest of this network beyond this first stop, I saw
multiple "nodes" on this network which were covered fishing nodes, each one
unique in its design and construction, even the bridges between them being
unique also, and I saw a place designed as a restroom a few nodes away. So I
begin making my way towards that direction, but I have to stop at another node
there as well, and as I come up to this node, this one being a sort of circular
node that was covered but was open in all direction except for the bridges that
connected to it, (which both connected to it in one corner of the circle, and I
know circles don't have corners but I mean corner in the sense that only a
small arc of this circle contained the bridges that connected to it and the
rest was open out, not entirely to open water as it faced more of the network,
but to a sort of openening in the network that gave access to a good chunk of
water), and when I came to this node, I examined the family that was fishing on
it to determine that it was Chuck and Michelle and Jessica and Chase. The only
people concerned my coming up to this node were Chuck, who was sitting in the
center of the node on top of what I somehow knew was an expensive ice chest,
and Michelle, who glanced over her shoulder and made an amicable gesture to me.
I stopped there and talked with Chuck for a bit, but not about anything that I
remember but instead just simply a short conversation, and I do remember
Michelle making more than an amicable gesture now that I think about it, but
she offered to give a spot for me if I wanted to join them. I respectfully
declined, and said that I was there more to explore, and I actually inquired to
them that I was looking for a restroom, and I wanted to confirm that the node I
was looking at was indeed a restroom. They replied that yeah, it was, almost in
a sort of way that said, "But why would you want to go there?" but they gave
their confirmation none-the-less, and thanked them and made my way over. As I
walked over there, I looked out to more bridges and more nodes, and at this
point I was getting to the point where I was approaching sort of the far edge
of this network of bridges from my parking location, but not entirely the far
edge, but still I knew I was about as far out as it would get from the parking
location, and I came up close to this outhouse. Now the way this outhouse was
designed, it was an open area, about chest high, with a door on the far end
that I was approaching it, and as I made it there, there was one person there,
I'm not sure if he was waiting for it of if he had just used it, but I felt
comfortable that I could go around him and use this toilet/outhouse area as no
one was using it and he was making no moves to enter it himself. And about the
time I was about to enter it (I didn't even see it in the dream, so I can't
describe what it looked like) I woke up.

Now I do want to say, when I woke up, I had to check myself a bit. I was
wearing loose sweat pants, my pants that have vegas and dice printed on them,
and I did a quick check to make sure they weren't soiled. I have not even to
this point used the restroom, not even to pee now that I think on it, but I do
have to poop a little bit, but not near so much as to warrent this dream.
Rather, I think it represents something, rather than an inclination to need to
poop, but instead it represents my apprehension to engage with others at the
embarrasment of the actions I have made. Indeed, shitting myself is a sort of
metephor that has been used by others to say when someone has fucked up. "He
really shit himself this time" and I think I understand after this dream that
the actual act of shitting myself in the dream came before my realization of
teh phrase, and I only just now remembered the phrase. It could represent my
choices to neglect my work, and in that way I have shit myself, and that is on
my mind, I know, so that could be the source of the dream, but I find it
strange that the main characters of the dream, and the ones I'm most embarresed
to make contact with, are my family and extended family, so I think it might be
a little deeper than this one case that I am failing to work on at work. But I
don't know.

Of the Father of Man

When they had gone through the hermitage, and found all of the belongings of
this man, let it be remembered and kept, the account of the mans notions and
visions of this world that he claims to have found, to have understood as the
real. The truth in these words I leave it to the reader to decide for himself,
for there are many things that some claim to be true, and must be navigated
carefully, but their truth is not always in fact but in their life. So this is
the life of the Father of Man, and the telling of it by the prophet. And so it
begins.

Of the beginning of everything, I wish to tell. Of the nature of man, and of
that which bore into him, which fled into his soul and gave him life, I must
tell of everything, for in this everything else is born. Yes, even God, and
Jesus, and the Devil, these beings, these spirits, these Divine Souls, yes even
Zeus and Hades, and Allah and Yahweh, and so many more that people do not know
about or have not even found to write about, I have seen them all. All, and
one, all from one, they have come. From this One, this way, I wish to speak. In
the beginning of all things, I begin my ramblings.

Oh, who am I, but a simple man of flesh, to have seen these things. To have
seen those spirits of the world where Chaos becomes Stillness, and Death
becomes Life, this upside-down place where no man is meant to go, this place
where time travels not forward or backward or even sideways, this place that
only the most wise and most in-tune of us get to visit. How blessed am I to
have seen it, but how wise I am to know that words will ever and always fail to
describe it in it's glory and justice. For what is this world if not the
embodiment of our ownselves? Indeed, I tell you that all of us, every one of
us, can see it and go there, but so many, only woefully too many of those with
feet that step upon the Earth, the mighty and terrible earth, will seek this
land and even see just a glimpse of it. Is it divine intervention? No, it is
mortal intervention, intervention of the soul, yearning to see that which makes
up the fabric of our existance. I have seen it, I have seen it only through the
lens of my blurred and immortal soul, and how inadequate my soul is to even
begin to attempt to describe this world to others. I tell you, I implore you,
this world cannot be described, it can only be visited. It can be visited by
every soul that has the ability to look into itself and find the world, the
way, the Eternal Way, that which goes beyond this world and into the next. No,
not the next, that is not the word, but the Other. The other. That is the
world. I have been there, and I only pray that my words allow others to go
there with their wisdom, with their soul, for I tell you that all of our souls
are the same, and what is seen in my soul, I that have been blessed with the
clarity of internal sight, who have been blessed with minimal influence of the
outer world, I have been able to see the world of the inner, in it's glory,
it's brightness, it's harmony and discordance of melody, but my vision is only
ever necceisarly imperfect, it is only from one angle that I see this world,
and each of us has our own angle, our own lens, with which we can view this
world, and we can only hope that by each of us sharing this world, and seeing
it, and letting our soul reveal itself to ourselves without intervention, it is
only be seeing this for ourselves, and then later, after seeing it through the
death of the ego and comparing accounts that we will be able to begin to
understand that which goes beyond our human thought. Yes, it is beyond
mortality, but even if this world is greater than any one of us, and perhaps
even all of us as humans, for I tell you everything, everything in this worldly
existance has it's own glimpse, it is only be becoming in tune with this
everything, the everything that is and that speaks to us in our sense, it is
only by touching as many of this everything that we can that we are able to
take glory and wisdom in what is only a fleeting knowledge of that which ties
it all together and weaves it all. And so I share my account, my imperfect,
blurred account that only comes from the angle of one soul, so that others may
see it from their angle and add to it, as we have done and have been doing for
millenia.

Oh, muses of Homer and Virgil, of Dante and Milton, yes, even the muses of
Newton and Einstein, muses of written thought and spoken word, of intellgent
sceintific speech and glorious prose and even the muses of Ceasar or Hitler,
muses of Isaiah or Mohammed or Ghandi or Buddha, those muses who inspire all to
try and bring their perfect vision of this other world into this imperfect one
and as such always neccesarily hit off the mark but always seek to illuminate
that which exists apart from us, oh glorious Muse, guide my words so that I may
bring my vision of this other world also into the hands of man. Let my words
not be final, and let any who seek to give the final account of all be known to
be false in that way, but instead guide my pen as it glides along the page so
that I may speak in a tongue that aims to guide the souls of as many that see
this as possible. O muse, take part of my soul, take me from my fleshly
existance, trancende my ego out of this world so that I may speak clearly and
plainly, without judgement, without preconception. Guide me so that I can
reveal to all the nature of All, the nature of my visions, these visions that
bind us all, that bind everything. Take me O muse!

First I must speak on the nature of these gods. Yes, gods, not God, because God
is simply one amonst these gods. I feel it neccesary to arrive at new name for
the beings, the spirits, the otherworldly that I see, some name other than god
lest I become mistaken for some false prophet, some slanderer who attempts
merely to reitterate the mythologies which have sprung out of our history. But
without another appropiate name coming to mind, let me just simply call them
the gods of the otherworld.

Every feeling, every emotion, and every action by every person or thing (yes,
even thing, no matter how inanimate it may seem) can be told of in the context
of a god. These gods do not have physical bodies or manifistations in this
world as we may think of them, but rather they inhabit an area of the other. A
god, once born, never dies, but will only grow more or less, and this growth
will come about by the comings and goings of our world into theirs. Indeed,
there is no portal from this dimension into that, or any other such nonsense,
there is no physical place that we can visit to find this other; rather, we can
only visit in our mind, and experience what we know to be them.

At this point, you might ask who am I to talk of my thoughts and my visions as
if they are real? But that is the whole crux of my preface, of the false
prophets who seek to bend and force their vision to their own will so that they
might see it. But the true prophet, the prophet who has no attachments to the
physical and wishes only to see this other world as it truely is, without
seeking to distort or morph it into his own conception of what it should be,
this is the kind of prophet I seek to be, and it is only in my words that
another may judge me to be true or false. Indeed, I know for certain that my
visions must be false to some extent, as I must bend them in order to fit them
into the framework of language that we use to share, and of that neccesary
morphing I see no way around, as we all live in this flesh and of the flesh is
how we communicate. So I implore the reader, try and remove the flesh from my
words, and see the visions I see for yourself. Don't let my words impose upon
you the visions that I know you can see, but instead let them guide you and
inspire you to visit this realm for yourself, in truth, so that you may judge
my words for your own.

Indeed, it is because of this history, the history of the gods, that I must
preface my history of the gods so. For in the beginning, there was no god of
Judgement, there was no god of Retribution, or Violence, or even of Love or of
Peace. No, in the beginning, as far as my vision can tell, there was only the
god of Stillness. And I say that only in my vision, for my vision can only go
back so far, as there is no true beginning of these things. Indeed, to say
something about the beginning is absurd, it's a construction of the flesh to
try and make sense of that which we cannot understand. However, as far back as
can be seen by our only so finite souls, the first god of this world was
Stillness. Stillness is empty, it is the vessal through which all things are
filled. It is the Dao that could be talked about in Eastern Religion. It does
not hurt, it does not feel. It has no thoughts, and it has no motive. Indeed,
this god named Stillness is only a god so much in the sense that there must be
some god to describe this concept. This god, Stillness, is the god from which
Chaos is born. And truly I tell you, Chaos is born out of Stillness.

And in this way I must tell you more about the nature of these gods, and more
the nature of this "Other realm" we speak of. The best way I can describe this
realm is in music. When one closes the eyes and listens, not even to a symphony
as that has too much humanity in it, but when one listens to nature, to the
sounds around you, and takes them in without judging them, one can be
transported to a new realm. In this realm, you have no senses, no feeling of
touch or sight or sound, nothing but your own conscious floating in a dream. It
is in this realm that the gods are born. When one feels something move in this
realm, in this state of meditation, that feeling of something is the closest
thing we as mortals of the flesh have to understanding these otherworldly
beings. These beings inhabit us and take us, and most don't think on it or
realize it. It takes great meditative introspection to understand it, and most
refuse to acknowledge that. This is the closest thing we have to seeing these
gods.

But let me tell you, these gods are real. They are real in as much as the grass
you step on is real, or the chirping of the bird in the forest is real. As much
as the love one man can have for a woman is real, these gods are real. Every
feeling, every emotion, however false it may be, is inhabited by these very
real and ever harmonizing gods. You may think my words are not so, but believe
me when I say that the feelings in introspection that one feels can be felt
across the self, without the ego, and without the ego, these gods are only too
real, perhaps even more real than what we may usually consider to be real. What
I speak to you I speak of as my understading of the world, as reality as I
experience it. Do not take this lightly, it is real, and I implore you to
suspend your disbelief so that you can come to understand that with me as well.

And so these gods are born in this realm, and though they may grow and shrink,
they never die. One god can consume another and encapsulate it, but that
original god has not died but merely changed form, it has morphed,
Metaphorphasized as Ovid might say, into another form. And gods are always born
out of another, not through intercourse (as indeed, the concept of intercourse
is a much fleshly one indeed) but through a sort of godly intercourse, through
two gods coming together as one, they not only are able to create something, a
new god out of their union, but also they will lose a part of themselves in
doing so, and in this way, their broader nature is brought into greater
divisions. But this union is never taken lightly, it only comes out of
neccesity. There is no courtship amongst the gods, only the union of them as
the physical requires it. In our own actions, and the actions of all in this
fleshly world that takes place do these gods transform and become changed.

To the skeptics in my audience who might say sadonically, "Oh wise prophet, if
this other world exists, and exists in the same way our world exists today,
then what are it's rules? Does a body in motion stay in motion, and a body at
rest stay at rest in this other world?" To this I say, the point is missed. The
visions of the prophet should not be wasted on finding trivial matters of rules
in this world. That is a devastaing waste of life, and to the person that
wishes to dismiss my visions simply because they do not have well defined
rules, I implore you to attempt to open your soul, not your mind but yes, your
soul, to my teachings, so that you may visit there yourself, because I know in
my heart that any soul can find it in themselves to visit, and when you visit
tell me if you still wish to know the rules of this world. If you visit, and
you say, "Yes, I would like to know the rules of this otherworld" still then
you have missed all of the other beauty and knowledge that can be gained from
the mere experience of the other. And perhaps you truly did experience all of
teh beauty and knowledge, and you have exhausted your interest in those aspects
of what I am to say to you, and if you have somehow managed to do that you are
truly more wise and connected than I can even begin to fathom, and if even
still at that point you wish to define the rules, than as one who is clearly
above myself in these matters, as a god amongst men (which such a thing is not
meant to exist) you may begin to define the rules for yourself.  But until
then (and then will never come to be I feel in my heart) I will only say that
the rules of this world are entirely secondary to the understanding of the
world.

And to those who say, "Wise sage, I have read your teachings, and I have
visited this world, but the world I visited was not like yours, but instead of
a forest where you describe a forest I saw a mountain, and instead of a god
where you saw a god I saw a tree" and etc and etc. for all the discrepancies
between your experience and mine, I say this. These discrepencies, if the world
you visited truely is the world that I visited, are merely discrepencies in the
flesh, in the manifestation of your experince of the world in comparison to
mine rather that differences in the world. Truely, we are all the product of
our enviorment, myself as any other, and our environment is what gives us these
visions. Indeed, it would be a great feet if you were able to see what I saw
exactly as I saw it, for that would be that you lived a life exactly as I lived
it, which would be a remarkable feature of our two lives being connected in
that way. You can see how absurd that would be, how maginificently impossible,
for two beings to share the exact same life experience. Indeed, truely that is
impossible, and though I do not know this to be true entirely, for I take
nothing to be the absolute truth, I know it it my heart that no two beings,
indeed, not even the smallest of quarks, would share the exact some experinces
in their life times, but instead each is taken as its own and is entirely
unique to itself.

This is why I speak of lenses and angles, when viewing this otherworld. I can
only visit and observe this world through my lens, and from my vantage point,
and you can only visit this world from your lens and your vantage point, and
this world is unique in that the lens and the vantage point don't obey the
standard rules of optics and vision of our world of light and sound. Indeed, I
hope I have impressed on you that the concepts of light and optics are complete
absurdities in this otherworld, but instead the visions and the sights and the
experinces had as they are described is merely the only way that we know how to
communicate these things to eachother, so let us communicate in that way so
that we may come to understand eachother. In fact, we must communicate with
eachother, as I truely believe that the only way to got the most complete sense
of this world is through communication and attempted understanding of all that
there is in this world.


