# 20180906
So last night I had some dreams, but I don't want to dwell on them.

I had a dream where I smoked some weed. These dreams have now gotten to the
point where I think, "Well, it hopefully won't come up on my urinalysis, but I
don't know if it will come up on my hair folicle." This dream was also
characterized by me explaining to Evan how all of the thinngs that happened to
me happened apart from Weed, and that weed was merely a catalyst for the things
that I did. I was very passionate in explaining these things to him, and I
could tell that he wasn't convinced.

The other dreams had to do with Final Fantasy games. I had gotten to a point in
FFXV where I "had to grind it out." and I thought, "All of the FF games have
some sort of technique for grinding, and why is that." So that is that. Again,
I don't want to dwell too much on this, because I don't think it's really
neccesary.

So there are two things that I want to talk about, and the second thing just
came up as I thought about my dream. So last night, as I was reading Freud, I
was reading the chapter about the oedipus complex, and I thought about FFX, and
I always used to think that, "It's just about a kid with daddy issues, and I
relate to that in some ways, so of course I like the story of FFX a lot, but
it's not somehow fundamental in the same way that a greek myth would be
fundamental." In other words, I like the story a lot, but I could not recommend
the story to someone as a great story, rather, it's a story that I personally
have fondness for.

After reading about Oedipus, I am not so sure this is the case. In fact, the
story of FFX and the story of Oedipus have actually radically different sorts
of views. I am struggling with the story of Oedipus, I don't fully understand
the story, and I don't really understand the reasoning behind it. I think,
though, thinking on it, the purpose of the story is to make the viewer feel
things. That is, the nature of your own discomfort, and that feeling of
uneasiness at these horrors being expressed in this way, that story is created
to evoke those feelings in a person. Rather, it might be more acurate to say,
that story was created *because* it evokes those feelings in a person.

So the story of Oedipus reveals a sort of horror in the reader, in that, this
is something that could have happened to anyone, and the story is a tragedy
because it actually does happen to Oedipus, and such a tragedy is the sort of
thing that can befall any man. In the sense, the oracle telling of the man who
will kill his father and lay with his mother, this is that story, the oracle
tells of that man, and we are doomed to that destiny if we are left to be blind
and ignorant of our destiny, as Oedipus was. So Oedipus is a tragedy. I think I
may understand it now. It makes you feel uneasy, and that is why the story is
told.

The thing is, the story does not make me feel uneasy in the way that I think it
should. THe story makes me feel uneasy because I have this inclination that the
story should have gone a different way. I think about Hamlet, and when I first
read Hamlet, I remember thinking, "Well, Hamlet is a representation of how one
shouldn't handle the death of your father, it represents the downfall of a man
that gives in to his depressive and counterproductive desires."

In this way, I then thought, "But I love tragedy, why is it that it always
seems that there is a sort of anti-message in tragedy." In tales of heroics,
the tale is very much given for the archetypical hero, and how he behaves
himself in the world that is given. Take the superheros that children love.
Someone can watch someone like Spider man and say, "I want to be like spider
man" and in so doing, they can act in their life as if they were spiderman.
Children will wear spiderman outfits and pretend to shoot webs, and all of
those sorts of things. So in this way, the superhero is an example of how one
should lead their life, its the example of how to conduct yourself in the
world, and by conducting yourself in the world in this way, you are able to
lead a life which is better than if you did not act in this way.

Tragedy, to me, seemed to be the opposite. "This is the example of how you
should not conduct yourself in the world." In this way, when I read Hamlet in
particular, I thought, "Well, I suppose that Hamlet is a sort of
anti-archetype, it's a sort of way of saying, don't behave in the world in the
way that Hamlet does, or else this is the tragedy that will ensue." Something
like that. So then I thought, "Well, how garbage is that, it only tells of the
way not to lead your life rather than the way you should. So perhaps I
recognize some of myself in Hamlet, but I am not able to do anything about this
because I only know the tragedy of Hamlet and not the heroic success of the
mirror of Hamlet." So in that way, I looked at tragedy and said, "I must be
missing something, bceause tragedy always resounds with me in a greater way
than heroics do, so I must be missing something about the message of Tragedy."

I think the difference is this. All works of art, be they plays, or novels, or
movies, or whatever, will seek to invoke a sort of primal instinct in a person.
There is something fundamental that will be placed upon the person that they
will react to. In heroic's that manifests itself as the call to adventure, in
the will to overcome the villian and acheive the girl of the desires as a
result. This invokes something of a "feel good" notion in someone, they watch
something like spiderman, and they see how Peter Parker acts and conveys
himself as Spiderman, and they see how he overcomes the Green Goblin, and they
are able to use that in their life.

But tragedy invokes a different feeling. I think, the point of Oedipus is not
to give a model of "how not to live your life" but rather, merely seeks to play
out some fantasy, probably deeply embedded in the psyche of someone, and to
bring it to the forefront, and then to show how this tragedy plays out. And if
the tragedy is good, then it will reveal to the person the tragic nature of
those tendencies, and in a way, it could cure them of those latent tendencies.
That is, if the tragedy is true. If the tragedy is untrue, if it is rather
propoganda and not tragedy, then instead it seeks to manipulate the nature of
the human. But in the case of Oedipus, or Hamlet, or Romeo and Juliet, and
etc., the tragedy is true, it reveals something fundamental abotu the nature of
how we act as humans, and not only that, but it reveals something about the
nature of our latent and repressed desires. It brings out the repressed
desires, and it forces us to feel them, and to experience them, in a way that
will evoke emotions in us. It is these emotions which we are supposed to feel
which give tragedy it's nature.

So I think to see something like tragedy as the "anti-pattern" for how we
should behave in the world is an incorrect way of viewing it. Rather, you
should see it as a means of bringing to the forefront your innate desires,
giving your psyche a means to explore those desires in a safe format.

Now, there is something that is inherently mature about tragedy. I think, this
must be so, because it has to do with the exploration of repressed desires. So
a young child, say under six, could not resonate with tragedy, in fact, it
might scare them, because they do not have the repressed desires. It would not
evoke those desires, rather, it would simply show them the anti-pattern of the
way to live their life.

So I think back to FFX now. The main theme of FFX is the overcoming of the
father. We are shown someone who has acheived what is considered the pinicle of
acheivment in his time. He has followed in his father's footsteps, and become a
star blitzball player, blitzball being the primary sport for these people. In
the very beginning of the game, we are shown someone who thinks that they have
it made, they have overcome the deeds of the father, in their mind, and his
father has died before he could overcome him.

So in the beginning of the game, we are introduced to this superstar, and the
first thing that happens is that the world he knows, and everything he knows,
is taken away from him.

We are then left in an entirely new world, where everything is hostile, and
people are trying to kill him.

In doing this, I feel I am not really truely equiped to evalute these things. I
want to read more on Jung and Freud before I continue to attempt to evalute the
symbols and symbolism in FFX.

So the second thing I wanted to talk about in this article today is "The
Agnostic Truth" and what the agnostic truth means to me.

I think, something that I truely hate about the word Agnostic is that it has
come to take this meaning that is near synonymous with Nihilstic. ANd this is a
dissapointing fact to me to say the least. I like the term agnostic, but the
fact that is has to be associated with this sort of nihilism is a consequence
of I think the danger that is too easily fallen in to when talking about
agonosticism.

So let's just begin with talking about what the term agnostic means from its
most literal point. So if something is agnostic, it means that that thing does
not show exclusive preference to any particular way of viewing something. Here
is the example I like to use when explaining agnosticism that doesn't have to
do with religion, and I think illustrates the power of thinking in an agnostic
way.

So the example I like to use, and perhaps I am biased because I am a computer
programmer, is programming. To say, I am an agnostic programmer, or rather, I
am agnostic in my choice of programming language, means this. I do not have any
sort of innate or prejudiced preference to using any particular programming
language when deciding on the best tools to for a particular task. To contrast
this, many people will say, "I am a front end developer that works with React
and Javascript." When someone says this, what they are saying is, "I solve
all problems that I am confronted with under the framework of React and
Javascript." Likewise, someone may say "I am a Java developer" or "I am a .NET
developer." What these people say is, "I have expertise in developing programs
using the Java programming language." Of course, when people say these things,
there is some sort of implication that they have at least some idea of other
ways of looking at these things. Most Java developers, if required, would be
able to write something in python if they were so forced. But I think, what is
characteristic of these people is, they say, "I work under a particular
framework, and I will take any problem and attempt to bend it into the
framework I am familiar with in order to solve it."

So I use this analogy because it reveals something about the agnostic truth
that I want to talk about. When it comes to programming, every problem can be
represented in any of these languages equally as well. If a language is turing
complete, which every language should be, then it is possible to solve the
problem in whatever language you choose. Essentially, what you come down to, is
you say, "there is an algorithm, and this algorithm could be thought of as the
fundamental truth of the solution to a problem, and each of the different ways
of representing the algorithm is merely a representation of taht fundamental
truth."

But I take this a step further. I say, "In what way do you represent the
algorithm? If the algorithm is the most fundamental part, the absolute answer
to the problem, then how do you represent the algorithm?"

In parenthesis, let's for a moment discard the idea that multiple algorithms
working by sepearte means could come to the same solution to the problem, e.g.
Quicksort and Mergesort accomplish the same goal, in that they sort an unsorted
list, and they come up with the same result, but they are certainly different
algorithms. I am not particularly concerned with this facet, but instead I am
more concerned with how you are to represent quick sort and merge sort.

So back to the question of how to represent an alogrithm. Someone with a
"fundamentalist" viewpoint, say, "a C fundamentalist" if you'll forgive me the
manner of speaking, would say, "I can create an algorithm in C that will
implement the quicksort, and in so doing I have revealed to you the algorithm
itself"

But then suppose a "Python Fundamentalist" comes along and says, "No Python is
the true way of the world, here is the implementation in Python, and in
creating this I have revealed to you the nature of the algorithm itself."

Now, any astute observer could see the most hilarious application of this
analogy and say, "Now the C fundamentalist and the Python fundamentalist are
going to fight for their claim to Isreal, how clever you think you are." But
that is not at all the point I am trying to make here.

The point I am trying to make is, it is possible to come up with two seperate
and distinct ways of looking at an algorithm that are both valid. Now, I take
in saying that they are not "Equally valid" because, well, you could imagine,
suppose you are working with some archetechture that a C compiler written for
it, but it does not know how to interpret Python code. In this case, the
representaiton of the alogrithm in C is "more correct" for this framework than
the representation of the algorithm in Python.

Or, more realistically, you begin to look towards the efficiency of the
assembly code that is generated by the two compilers, and if you start to
compare those, you see that there are differences in the way that the Python
assembly and the C assembly are put together, so in this way, they provide
different angles of the truth of the algorithm. Perhaps that is the way to
think about it.

What I am getting at though, is that not all of these representations are
equal. They have a value, and their value might be difficult to measure, one
because it's difficult to put these sorts of things on scales, but also because
the number of dimensions of these scales of value is more than one, but they
have a value, and the value of one algorithm will be different than the value
of the same algorithm when seen through a different lens.

So now we have to look at what it means to be agnostic. To be agnostic means
to look at both of these solutions, and say, "Both of theses solutions reveal
an aspect of the nature of the algorithm." Now, this is something that is
difficult for a fundamentalist to grasp. The python fundamentalist says, "But
my way of viewing the algorithm is complete, so therefore I reject the view of
the C fundamentalist and posit that Python is the only way that you need to
look at the view of the algorithm." And likewise for the C fundamentalist. But
the agnostic viewpoint says, "There are many ways of viewing the alogrithm, and
all of them are correct in someways, but less than adequete in others." For
instance, in teaching someone new to programming, you might want to use the
python version because it is easier to understand, but when implementing the
sorting algorithm of an embedded system where resourse management is a key
factor, you might want implement the C version, but in the case where proof of
correctness of the algorithm is a cause for concern, you would lean more in
favor of the python version because correctness in easier to prove for a high
level langague over a lower level language like C. I could go on with these
sorts of comparisons, but I think you get the point.

Now, I want to reveal a sort of trap that is easy for one with a fundamentalist
viewpoint to fall into. When you introduce a fundamentalist to the idea of
agnosticism, and they are open to the new idea and are ready to reject their
idea of fundamentalism, they may say something like, "I see what you are
saying, Python and C both reveal the fundamental truth of the algorithm. It's
really just a way of saying that both Python and C are really a part of a
greater, more fundamental way of looking at it. So the Turing Machine is the
abstract way that we look at the algorithm, and Python and C are both ways of
making concrete the abstraction of the Turing Machine. So the abstact idea of
the Turing Machine is the fundamental way of looking at an algorithm, but
Turing machines are hard to work with, so instead we work with the idea of
Python or C."

This trap is easy to fall in to. But it shows a neccesity of the fundamentalist
to cling on to the idea of fundamentalism. The fundamentalist has to have
something that they consider "The absolute way of viewing something" and then
they treat everything else as a lens with which they view that thing.

But I argue this way. Every way of viewing something is neccesarily a
representation of that thing. There is no fundamental way of viewing that
thing. What do I mean by this? I mean, even the idea of the Turing machine, in
our example, is simply another representation of the way to view an algorithm.
In fact, anyone versed in computer science will know of the Church Turing
equivelency, which says that the lambda calculus, which rather unlike the
turing machine in the way it represents how to view an algorithm, is equivilent
in what it can describe to the turing machine. So everything you can express
with a turing machine, you can express with a lambda calculus, and vice versa.
So then you have to ask yourself, "Which is the more fundamental way of viewing
the algorithm, is it the turing machine, or is it the lambda calculus?"

Of course, the answer I am getting at, and the crux of what I mean when I say
the agnostic truth, is, "There is no fundamental way to view a truth, there
will always and neccesarily be many ways that a truth can be represented."

So now we get into the real fun part of this discussion, we get to talk about
what that truth means. You say, "Okay, fine, I agree that any way that we
represent the truth is never neccesarily the absolute way of viewing that
truth, and that all of the ways of viewing the truth will be met with pro's and
con's to that way in viewing the truth, but still, we have not hit the heart of
the issue, we have merely only looked through the lens of the issue. The heart
of the issue is, that there actually IS a truth, and where we have the
difficulty is in understanding a way to represent that truth. So how do we
define the truth? If there is an absolute truth, but no absolute way to
represent it, then what does that possibly mean?

My working statement is "There is still an absolute truth, but not an absolute
way to represent that truth." I have added on to this statement after reading
it again, and I might want to expand upon this added on statement at a later
time, "There is an absolute truth, but it impossible to know what that absolute
truth is without using a representation that is neccisarily not absolute." This
has to do with the nature of human consciousness. "It is the consciousness,
which must make a representation of that absolute truth, through which we see
all things, and there is no fundamental way to represent that absolute truth to
the consciouness, so the most complete way of seeing the absolute truth is by
seeing it through the many lenses of consciousness and evalutaing each for
their own merit."

In other words, to think agnostically is to say, "I choose never to have innate
preference to in the way I view the truth." It is to say, "I have a fundamental
understanding of what that absolute truth is, and instead of having that truth
reveal itself to me in only one of these fundamental ways, I see that truth
reveal itself to me in all of these ways, and I take each of them for what they
are worth, and discard those ways that are of less worth, at the discretion of
that which judges the value of these representaitons."

Such a powerful notion. This is why I think it's a great disservice to think
that the agnostic is like a nihilist, that the agnostic is unconcerned with
matters of truth, and that the agnostic seeks only to hand wave away their view
of the world by saying, "All truths are equally valid" or other such straw man
claims. This is the nature of the weak agnostic, and unfortunately, an
idealogy is defined by it's weakest members.

It is for this reason that Agnosticism will fail as a movement. The weakest
members of the agnostic viewpoint, or rather, the grossest misinterpretation of
the agnostic viewpoint, is so markedly weak, that the whole of the viewpoint
will neccesarily fall to this feeble least common denominator. The weakest
Christian will still understand the notion of fearing the Lord, but the weakest
agnostic will say, "All things are equally true and so everything is true in
the same way." In a cage match of ideas between the weakest Christian, and the
weakest agnostic, the Christian will win. But in a case match of ideas between
the strongest Christian and the Strongest agnostic, I think again, the
Christian would win. The master of one will overcome the master of none.

The mind cannot hope to come to the point where it can become the master of
all. That is the goal of agnosticism, and it is contrary to what our minds are
capable of. But there is an agnostic truth. So I think the correct path is
something like this. "Become a master at one, and in times of difficulty,
remember the agnostic truth, and let go of that which you are the master at,
and seek to further your understanding of the world." Always remember the
agnostic truth.

I want to take another angle of this now, and use a more layman analogy, to
talk more about what "Truth" might mean.

There are two kinds of truth that people will talk about, they will talk about
the objective truth, and the metaphorical truth. The best example I have heard
of is the example of the gun.

The objective truth of the gun is "A gun is composed of a chamber, and bullets,
and a magazine, and a trigger, and the firing mechanism of the gun works in
this way, and the trigger spring mechanism works in this way, and so on and so
on, and by doing the bullet will be propelled with such and such force, and so
on and so on" and we could continue on like this, describing all of the
objective facts of how the gun is operated.

But suppose now that you have a gun, and you are imparting your wisdom of the
gun to someone who knows very little about guns, and wishes to learn from you
everything you know about guns. What are some of the truths about guns that you
will impart unto this student?

Of course, you will tell teh student about the trigger mechanism, about how a
magazine works, about how to cock the gun, and so on, but before any of that,
any gun owner that's worth any salt will say that the first rule of guns is to
"Treat every gun as if it is loaded at all times."

What is this statement? Well, this statement is what you call a metaphorical
truth. To use the words of Bret Weinstien, "A metaphorical truth is a statement
of fact about the world that, if someone believes in it, gives them a tangible
advantage in the world over if they had not believed in it." In other words,
believing in a metaphorical truth, even if it doesn't match the objective
truth, gives you an advantage over someone that does not believe in the
metaphorical truth.

So in the case of the gun, the metaphorical truth is to treat every gun as if
it is loaded at all times. What this means is, even if you pull out the
magazine, open the chamber to see that there is no bullet, turn on the safety,
and do all of the other things neccesary to check to ensure that the gun is
unloaded, you will still treat the gun as if it is loaded. You will not point
the gun at anyone that you would not want to shoot, and you will take care when
operating the gun in anyway.

To act in this way gives you a tangible advantage over someone who does not
hold this belief that every gun is loaded. Accidents occur by people who
"thought the gun was unloaded" and even when they make precautions, if the gun
is not treated as if it is loaded, accidents can happen.

So in this case, when imparting the knowledge that the gun is loaded, you are
saying to the person, "this is a metaphorical reality that is contrary to the
objective reality, but wisdom and experience has shown that it is a valid
metaphorical reality."

At this point, it's rather easy to see the parallel to anything else, and in
particular, you can see the parallel to science and religion. Science seeks to
understand the objective reality, and religion seeks to understond the
metaphorical reality.

But now, rightly so, you have an objection. You argue, "The gun is not loaded,
though, we know that to be true, so to tell people that the gun is loaded, that
is lying to them, and it's simply not true."

And at this point, I must agree with you, to tell someone that the gun is
always loaded, and to only give them that information, is a gross
misinterpretation of the way to view the world.

But likewise, to say to someone, "These are the objective facts about the gun"
without giving them the metaphorical truth, is also a gross misinterpretation
about the world.

The problem is this. The objective truth can reveal things about the
metaphorical truth, and vice versa, we can look to our metaphorical truth to
find clues about the objective nature of the world. But these two things are
distinct, and misalligned things. In other words, one does not derive the
other, they are both derived from something separate. They are both about the
nature of the gun, and about the truth of the gun.

So I say this. The best way to view the world is to see both of these truths
simultaneously.

At this point, those that hope to cling on to the idea of "Science vs Religion"
as if these two things are somehow aiming at the same thing, let me illustrate
my gun example to the two extremes.

The man who gives his student a gun only with the objective truth will do that
student a disservice in that the chance of accident happening with that gun are
very high.

But take the other example, suppose you give a student a gun, and the only
truth you give him about the gun is "Treat every gun as if it is loaded." The
student will then say, "I believe you, the gun is always loaded" and he will
think this is great. He maybe has doubts about this, but he trusts his master
and wishes to employ his faith in him. The student, in extreme cases (which
seem absurd, but such absurdities are the place we have gotten to in the case
of religion) will even go so far as to say, "I don't even need to buy
ammunition, the gun is always loaded, and so it's magazine must always contain
bullets if that is true."

But then, when the student is later being attacked in a parking lot, and he
draws his gun, which is objectivally unloaded, with the belief that the gun is
loaded, he will fire futily at his attacker, who will overpower him and beat
him and steal his possessions.

So in this way, there is a danger in accepting either truth without the other.

The fundamental facet of this whole argument is this. There are two kinds of
truth, and these two sorts of truth do not derive eachother, and they can even
contradict eachother, and if either truth is taken in abscence of the other, we
are led to a situation which is less ideal then both truths taken together.
