# 20180909
So last night I had a whole stream of dream fragments. I will do my best to try
and recount them. In fact, the fragment at the end is the most in the forefront
of my mind, so I will begin with that.

So this fragment begins, and I enter into Kroger. It's actually quite uncanny
how similar it is to actual Kroger it is, but it's enough dissimalar that it is
definitely a dream version of it.

So I enter into Kroger, and I go to the left side of the store. There, I talk
with someone, and I forget who this someone is and what we talk about, but we
talk for a bit. I do remember, she was a woman, and she was european in origin.
She reminds me of that woman that I played ultimate with in winter league a
couple of years ago. I forget her name.

So after talking with her, I go back to the front, and I see Larry, and larry
is setting up a studio for his new employee to talk in front of the camera
about the coffee.

So I walk over to this young man, and he is setting up the studio, and as he is
setting up, I remember making prelimnary small talk, like, "Oh, so you're
Larry's new employee huh?" and he said, "Yeah" and I believe he also mentioned
that he was a little nervous because this was the first time that he had done
this in front of the camera. I said, "Oh, of course, well, I have some of my
old notes, if you want to use them, they are a little unintelligable on their
own, but I could explain them to you if you would like." As I was saying this,
he showed me his notes, that were very similar to mine, in that they had the
same information on it, and he said, "Oh, I made some notes of my own, so I
appreciate it, but that's okay." I then said, "Oh, okay, well, if I could offer
some advice, just pretend like the camera is someone that walks into your
coffee shop and you are explaining the coffee to them like any other customer."
And he said, "Oh, I'm not talking to the camera, I'm going to be talking with
an actor who is acting as a prospective customer, so that won't particularly
help me." I then remember, the actor was a somewhat middle aged black lady, and
she was sitting in a chair that was opposite an empty chair, which was clearly
the chair that he was going to sit in. I then thought, "Oh, so things are done
differently than when I did this. Well, I suppose I'll stop trying to be
helpful, because I am clearly in the way," and at that point I walked away, as
he began to sit down in the chair and interview the black lady.

So I went back around through the store, all the way around to the back right
corner of the store. This part of the store was more like the part of the store
that becomes a library in my mind. I remember, I met a bigger man here, the
sort of man wearing a dirty wife beater with a beer belly, and we talked for a
little bit here. I don't remember much.

I think that was it, and the end of that dream was the waking up for real.

Before that, the dream I had in the beginning of the night, was a dream that
was about BJJ in Chuck and Michelle's house. So Chuck and Michelle's house, to
me, has two parts, the house part and the backhouse part, and this part of the
dream took place in the house part. I know, there were BJJ mats that were set
up there. The more important part of the dream was, I remember people, I think
probably Michelle, were trying to give me alcohol, and I had to keep declining.
I remember, trying to read the labels on the alcohol, and thinking, "I'm not
even allowed to consume the label." And here, the word consume was taking the
dual meaning of "consume" as "consume a piece of literature," and "consume" as
"consume some alcohol." And so, I remember the dream fragments just became
these sort of excerpts, that would float in my subconscious, and I was wary to
consume them, because I knew that I wasn't allowed to consume alcohol, and I
remember thinking, "It's okay to consume in this way though, just not in the
other way." But I was still uneasy about consuming the literature. That is, I
remember in my mind that each excerpt was tied to a certain strain of alcohol,
and I thought, "It's okay if I consume this" but then I thought, "It's not okay
if I entirely consume it, as in, I'm allowed to consume but, but not to consume
it." It was a very strange segment of the dream, and one that I rememmebr quite
vividly.
