# 20180907
So last night I had a most interesting dream. It was one coherent dream, and it
was surprisingly stable as far as dreams go, as in, there were no warps, and no
strange objects going from one place to the next.

So the start of the dream took place in a hotel. I walked in to the front desk
(which was rather like the hotel in The Shining now that I think about it.) and
asked to check in to the room that my mom had reserved for me. I am pretty
certain it was on the third floor.

The thing about it too is, I remember this was similar to what happened at
Jaq's wedding, where my mom wanted to rent a separate room for me since I was
sick at that time. It's just, in the dream, she did rent a separate room,
because it was her, and Anne, and they each already had their own room, but
they said something like, "We want to get a third room for you all and it can
act as a sort of central hub for all of us."

So I walked in, and checked in to the room, and went up the stairs to the room.

Like I said, the room was on the third floor. The way it worked, the stairs
came up on the west side of the third floor, which I think was the highest
floor of the hotel, and when you walked out of the stairs, straight ahead was a
sort of common area, and all the way to the back, and to the left, there were
rooms, and then to the right, covering the whole south side of the space there
was the room that I had just checked out.

There were two entrances to the room. They were both facing north. The one on
the western side, you get to by walking straight to it by turning immediately
right from the stairs, and the other one was towards the eastern side of the
room, which you would have to walk across the "common area" to get to, and then
turn right.

So I walk in to the main entrance, and I am met with the room.

The room, as I said, spans across the entire south wall of the hotel, so it is
a rather large room. Along the eastern side, there is something of a set of
couches, but the couches are somewhat stylish, in a way that reminds me almost
of the sort of couches you would see in a sci fi space ship or something of
that nature. The couches started on the east wall, and then went along the
south wall. They were white as well. In the middle, there were small tables and
things like that. Inbetween the two entrances, there was a fireplace, and a
whole mantle and such. Along the west wall, there was a bar area. Then, as you
continue from the main entrance, and go south, you then go "beyond the south
wall" (that is, the south wall is not straight, but has this sort of enclave in
it) and in this area, there was a whole "massage area". In this massage area,
on the very far end was one table, and then on the west wall was a table that
folded out from the wall, and came perpendicular to it.

So as I was acquainting myself with this room, the concierge that was there
said something like, "If you would like to utilize our services at this time,
just let me know and I can accomadate you." I thought this refered to the water
there, but then I realized that he was refering to a massage, and I considered
both of these things, and thought that they would both be overpriced, so I
respectfully declined, and proceeded to make myself at home in the room.

Pretty soon after this, my mom came in, and she said, "Oh, you got the room,
this is great." and proceeded to make herself at home as well. She then said,
"Have you had a chance to try this place out yet." And I said that I haven't
but the guy offered to give me a massage.

I then quickly began to realize that, all across the "common area" were men and
women both going around, and checking the various rooms for a massage. The
women were all in bikinis, made out of shiny material, and the guys were all
dressed in various ways, generally very fashionablly speaking.

So I started to gather that this hotel was not like a usual hotel, this was a
sort of "getaway" hotel, and that the whole purpose of it was to receive
massages from these various people. They would walk around the hotel and offer
to give massages, and the whole point of the place was for this purpose.

So at this point, what I remember is going through a few people. I know that my
mom, and Kyle, and I were all there, and I feel like there might have been more
people in the room. I know my dad shows up later, but not until later in the
dream.

But at this point, having now discovered the purpose of the hotel and the whole
reason we were there in the first place, we then sort of went to our own
devices, and each did our own things. I remember, there were a couple of guys
that came in to the room, and I considered recieveing a massage from one of
them, and I might have even strated to recieve one, but I very much wanted a
massage from one of the girls there. So I remember I also went to the main
area, and I went out and I fetched one of the girls, and I requested a massage
from her.

She took her top off as I lay on the table, the foldout table there, on my
stomach, and she took her top off as I said, and began to give me a massage.

This whole things lasted for some time. I remember, the massages were something
of a "paid service" so you could only recieve one massage at a time for a
limited time span, and when the time was up, you would have to find and pay
someone else to give you the massage.

So it was after this massage that I decided to check in on Kyle, and I found
that he had recieved a massage as well, his on the couches there, and he
couldn't handle it, and he threw up over everything.

There was a time there when we had to wait for everyone to clean up everything,
and so I remember at this point we started talking about other things. I think,
I began talking to one of the masseuses there, and we started talking about
Nietsche.

So I lied, this dream does have something of an exlanation warp. Because as the
guy started talking about Nietsche, he talked about one of Nietzsche's early
performances. He talked about, when Nietzsche was young, he gave a speech in
front of a crowd completely naked, staying erect the whole time, that is,
appropiately erect, and that was the performance. How beautiful he was, the guy
explained, just look at him, the face, the body, everything so perfectly in
line, like the statue of David, and he stayed erect the whole time, and he
would give philosophical points throughout the standing. "The value of
existentialism is derived not from self but instead from the intrinsic value of
that which seeks to find the existantial nature." That was something he said,
and I rememebr thinking, "Well, that's a little pretensious and doesn't really
mean anything," but the guy thought it was so profound. And then, what struck
me about this whole thing (like I said, I was transported to this description
in the dream) was the confidence with which he portrayed himself. He stated his
philosphical claim as if it were a fact, and continued to stand proudly, whith
his erect penis, and started walking among the audience. There were women there
who were in awe of him, and he began walking among them, and they were all
dressed in these very formal dresses, like something you would wear to a prom,
and he went up to one of them, and grasped her, and made one motion, a
convultion that began from his feet, and went through his body, and emulated
the concept of penetration in a very artistic way, using her as the object of
the penetration. Of course, she was totally overcome by this action, but he
continued to pose and move on and through the crowd, and continue on with his
performance.

The whole stage was shaped like a circle, and in a semicircle around the stage
was where the people were, and then behind this semicircle was a whole "behind
stage" area, not backstage, but instead a part of the stage that everyone could
see, and in it, there was a table.

So at this point, a man came in, and he said, "I would die to have the
opportunity for you to bring me to orgasm." At this, Nietzsche motioned him
toward the table, towards the back, and the man took off his robes, and layed
on his back, as Nietzsche motioned and gesticulated, applying single strokes to
this mans erect penis with his hands, but his entire body was involved in each
stroke, and it was like he was becoming into the act, acting out a play or
something, and this entire thing was a part of his performance.

Around this point is when the explanation ended. They had finished cleaning up
all of the vomit that Kyle had made, and we were ready to resume our massages.

So at this point, there were a few men there giving massages, and that was the
only options there, so I decided rather than wait for a woman again, I would
take a massage from a man.

All of these details I don't really remember. I also remember, at the point
that I am about to describe next, I was being massaged by a woman, suffice it
to say, there was a lot of this dream of having short massages and short
intervals and such where things happened that were very vivid to me in the
moment, but were not particularly interesting in the dream.

So the next thing I remember, I was being massaged by the girl, and my dad was
sitting there, and we started talking. The only really notable thing I remember
about this, besides what happens after, is this. I began telling my dad about
how this place works, and I told him, "All of the girls, they walk around in
bikinis, but when you request one of them, they take their top off, and so they
are topless when they give you the massage." That was it regarding that.

So the next thing that happened, and this was toward the end of my massage, I
remember my mom requested a massage from a man who was wearing a male thong. It
was shiny, like the girls bikinis. My mom requested a massage from this man,
and they went to the table that was like the bunk that I talked about, past the
foldout table that I was getting my massage on.

My mom then, complete naked, layed face down on the table. I know she was
naked, because when I looked up, I wanted to deterimine if she was actually
naked, and I looked between her legs as she lay there and saw that she was
indeed, naked.

At this point, my dad got up to interject. He said to the man, "You better not
dare to touch her or penetrate her in any way, that's what makes her so
special." I found this interesting, that my dad thought that what made my mom
so special was that she had no one besides him penetrate her.

The man said in reply, "Trust me, I've been doing this for a long time, and I
have learned how to skillfully avoid both the genitals of women and of men in
my time doing this, it's better for everyone that way. My dad then said, "You
know what, I respect you, and I trust you."

The thing that struck me most about this though, was this. During the time when
the masseuse was preparing the massage, my dad actually stood up. He stood up,
and made his objections, and made to actually walk over and stop him. I
observed my dad, and I looked at him and I saw, "He isn't even wobbling, he is
very stable on his feet here." I thought, "wow, he has recovered rather
quickly, this surprises me."

So at this point, I'm not sure exactly what goes on. There might have been more
massages, but our time there was certainly winding down. I remember talking
with Kyle a little bit, just about the vomit incident, and he might have said
something there. But I do remember at least walking out the room and getting
ready to check out. I remember, when I woke up, I remember thinking, "That was
a rather appropiate end to the dream." so I think the end of the dream was
walking out of the room and beginning to go down the stairs to check out.

That was the dream.

I will make note, I know I was erect both during the dream, and when I woke.
Quite a bit of morning wood. I think the massages come from the idea that I am
sore, and I actually thought, last night as I came back from BJJ, I could
really use something like a massage. I woke up somewhat stiff, and thought,
"How appropiate, my dream wanted to keep me asleep by relaxing my muscles by
giving me a massage." But you can see where a lot of other themes get mixed in
there.
