# 20181102
So today I want to talk through something I more or less just realized. I was
watching a clip between Joe Rogan and Sam Harris talk about the nature of Free
Will, and it was a very stimulating conversation. This realization came to me
at the part where they began to talk about the justice system and it's flaws,
and I believe I have a rather nice taste of this sort of thing at play.

But that's not the most original thing. I am not here to write something about
how I have been victimized by a corrupt justice system, or how I've been
mistreated unfairly, or any other self-indulgant garbble and white noise about
the "patriarchy" or "society" or any other such ill conceived notions of the
world around me.

Instead, I think I have come to something, a sort of realization, about the
nature of my arrest and my development through this process, and how it relates
to my psyche, that seems to resonate with me on at least some level. Of course,
there is a level of disconcordance, but in order to explore this idea I will
table that disconcordance for now and instead indulge the realization in it's
completeness.

I allowed myself to become arrested in order to understand the disease that my
father is afflicted with.

This is a rather strange notion, so lets unpack a bit what isn't meant by this
statement. I did not allow myself to get arrested due to some level of
discovering empathy for my father. I am not suggesting that my arrest was out
of some sort of desiring to suffer so that I might understand how my father is
suffering. This is not sympathy pain, this realization.

Rather, I think there is an analogy here about the system in place at the
country level, along with the system in place at the human being level, that is
so strong that it suggests a level of correspondance between the two.

Since I am indulging this realization, let's just draw the analogy explictly.

Luekemeia is a disease of the bone marrow, in particular, the aspects of it
that create white blood cells. In a way, the white blood cells are the cells
that directly correspond to the police force. In the way that the white blood
cells patrol the veins to remove hostile cells, so the police system patrols
the streets to remove hostile human beings.

My arrest was an analogy to the way in which my fathers white blood cells have
become cancerous.

To draw more deeply on the analogy, the government, and in particular, the
justice system, almost always take the form of a strict father figure in
mythology. I don't have examples to draw from, besides the obvious Zeus, and of
course "God the Father," but I feel as though the intuition of the justice
system corresponding to the image of the father is strong enough that it
doesn't need justification.

So in this way, the white blood cells of our justice system have captured and
caught someone like me, a false positive when it comes to the legality of this
entire thing.

So it's easy to say, "the system is broken and needs to be fixed." But that is
exactly the case for my fathers treatment. He has undergone eight treatments of
Chemo, and a bone marrow transplant, along with countless infusions and other
trips to the emergency room, all in the hopes of purging the Luekemea from his
body and replacing it with a more correct system.

So in what sense is this like our justice system? Well, I think the first thing
to realize is, when it comes to such a purge similar to the one that my father
has undergone, to draw the analogy to it's extreme, which we do at our own
risk, subjecting the society to a sort of chemo treatment followed by a
grafting of a new system in place of the old one, such a thing is not going to
happen.

But it does give a way of thinking about the litmus test of the health of our
nation. We can look at the nation, and it's history through the justice system,
and use this analogy to the health of the individual to gauge the health of the
nation.

It also goes to show that, in the case of a nation, such a thing will live, and
die, according to the forces at work. There is no such thing as medical
intervention, at least, not from the sense of a third party (which would be
another nation in this case) applying a medical process to this
"super-organism". In fact, it could be thought that such a thing does indeed
happen to smaller nations. In a way, intervention by one nation in another
nations affairs corresponds loosely to the medical process of one person acting
on behalf of another where the original persons internal systems are inadequete
in dealing with a disease.

Something also interesting to note here, and merely interesting since we are
using analogies to make sense of these concepts and extend them at our own
peril, is that what one would consider the cause of such a disease in the
idealology of a nation would be brought forth in the thoughts and ideas of the
individuals, and the corresponding power of those people with those ideas, and
the degree of correspondance with those ideas to their enactment in the real
world.

In other words, the source of the health of a nation is brought forth by the
way in which those that are in power of the nations doing are inclined to apply
their way of thought to the mandates of the nation.

So could the same thing be said of a disease like Luekemia? Perhaps yes, but
perhaps not either. It's unknown what the cause of such a disease as Luekemia
is. In fact, thinking about things in this way is definitely misleading. To
think, this whole disease could have been averted had my father adopted and
applied a different idealogy to his life. Such a thought is wrong.

Still, I find it interesting that, in a way, to understand the disease of a
nation that has an overbearing police force in a similar way to understand the
disease of luekemia is quite apt. I think was is most appropiate is to take the
attitude towards the disease is to take the attitude towards the justice system
in the same way. While one can certainly fight the disease in the body, it does
no good simply to say, "the human body is fucked up, my cells are victim to a
corrupt system." In a similar way, complaining or dwelling on the corruptness
of the police force is not helpful. Simply realizing that both things are
merely a product of the forces that came to create them is something of an
insight.

I'm not sure where the profundity of this realization comes from for me. But to
see the system of my father and the system of that which arrested me, put me in
prison, and proceeded to alter my life for at least the next year or so as in a
sense the same system, and to see myself and to desire myself to be unlike
these systems in some fundamental way is enlightening to me. At the very least,
it gives me a way to cope with my arrest, and to understand it in terms of some
Fruedian attempt to more greatly understand the forces at work in both my
father and in "father society".

I think also, it illustrates the point that simply diagnosing a problem is
insufficient for what you should do about it. To say, "Our society has
Luekemia" no matter how strongly you yell it, without knowing anything about
Luekemia, and without knowing anything about how a society might get it or how
it might be corrected in a society, nor having the ability to do so, gets you
nothing. I am able to more greatly understand my father's illness by falling
victim to it at the cellular level myself.
