# 20180805
So I am missing yesterday's article, but that is okay. I think it is okay that
that article is missing. I did indeed write a good amount yesterday both in
Russian learning, but also in my dragon story, so I am not excusing myself for
not writing that article, but it just so happened that yesterday I did not get
to writing, which I am dissappointed a bit in, but I don't think it is a great
crime.

So I am not sure where to start with this article. Last night I did have a
dream. I had a series of dreams. And the interesting thing is, I kept waking
up and thinking, "okay, I really need to wake up and write down these dreams, I
am going to forget them, and if I don't wake up and write them down, I will
forget them. I woke up probably a half a dozen times thinking this. And every
time that this happened, I would proceed to not wake up, but instead I would go
to sleep, and dream that I was writing the dreams down, and I would say, "Okay,
good, at least I have something written down, that's good." And then I would
wake up again and say to myself, "Damnit, I didn't write them down, I am going
to forget them, I need to remember these dreams," and I would go back to sleep.
As I said, this process, or a process like it, repeated maybe a half dozen
times throughout the night, and each time I would gain some solace in the fact
that I was writing these dreams down, or that I was actively remembering them,
before I would realize that no, in fact, I was not remembering them, and that I
was still dreaming.

So let's talk about the dreams for a little bit.

Like I said, I do believe this was a series of dreams. I remember two parts of
the dreams. I remember a portion of the dream at the dream version of the
mountain that I ski at. I have had these skiing dreams before, and this one was
very similar to those sorts of dreams. The other sections of the dreams took
place in a hotel. This hotel had similarities to the house Granny and Papa had
on Idlewood, but it was bigger, and had more rooms, and was generally it's own
sort of conception. It was more like a condo than it was a hotel.

Honestly, thinking back on the dreams now, I don't know what much there is to
say about them. I remember skiing with Kyle, and the only thing I remember
about it was that Kyle was having some troubles on the mountain, and that I
remember having to go back to him and try and help him, and that it was slowing
down my experience a little bit. But I wasn't resentful of him, I just remember
it being a challenge going back up the slope, or rather around the flatter
parts of the slopes, to go back and help him. Although I don't really think it
was too help him. I just remember, because of him, I was going down the
mountain in a way that I wouldn't have if I were by myself. So that was all
that. That was all I remember there.

As far as the hotel goes. I remember going in and out of this hotel. I also
remember some road trip like areas, where we actually got into a bus at some
point, and we were traveling with a whole bus of people. Again, I honestly
don't remember many details of this whole thing at all. I am very
scatterbrained with my memory of the dream, and well, I suppose that might
indicate something. I think honestly the most interesting thing about this
series of dreams was that I wanted to wake up and write it down so badly, and I
dreamed that I was doing something like that multiple times.

So enough about the dream, I want to talk a little bit about yesterday.

Yesterday was an interesting day. I woke up really early, and it started as a
sort of usual Saturday. The night before I had no dreams, and I remember not
being able to go to sleep at all. Actually, I haven't even talked about the day
before yesterday. I have had two nights in a row now where I have deviated from
the diet I have set for myself, and I must say that it is quite noticable the
effects I have when I do that.

So the day before yesterday was the day that Liel invited me over to her house
to meet her husband and have "A Russian dinner". That was very pleasent, but I
remember it being well, how would you say it, it was the sort of thing where I
was trying so hard to be nice, that I felt like I couldn't be myself, and I
wanted to try and relax and make myself at home, but I imagine the impression I
gave off was one of a sort of "well he was nice" I think, but I certainly was
not "a great entertainment" or anything like that. I had no social anxiety
really, but I did feel as though the conversation was a little stale at times.
We would talk about "where have you traveled" or "what do you do" all of those
sorts of conversations. At least the conversation didn't devolve completely
into, "What sort of music do you like," or "Have you watched any good movies
lately?" so that was good. Also, we had the subject matter of the languages we
were exchanging, so most of the time spent there was spent helping eachother
with language. So that was good.

Their food was good. The dish that Michael, Liel's husband, cooked was a
Russian dish, and I still forget the name. I could go and look it up but I
don't want to do so right now. But essentially, it was lamb cooked with rice
and some spice in a slow cooker sort of thing on the stove. The lamb was good,
I had never had lamb before, but I remember there was a lot of rice. They also
made it with the small potato ball things, and with some salad, and some bread,
so in essence, the majority of the meal was compesed entirely of strachy
grains, which goes completely against the diet I am trying.

And that is what I said was the most interesting about that night. First, I
absolutely could not go to sleep. I could literally feel as though my sleep was
not taking place. It was an interesting thing. So there was that. The second
thing was, when I did go to sleep, which was probably around 12 or 1, I woke up
later around 6, and I had absolutely no dreams that night. So the whole thing
I think is a homage to the diet I am trying. That, and I remember having some
heartburn, just mild, but I remember having some indegestion throughout the
day.

I then proceeded to pass out again around noon or one in the afternoon the next
day, after I had written about bit in my Dragon story, after I did a good
amount of writting in Russian, or rather, simply evaluating the phrases that
Liel gave me the night before. I then went to practice some mozart, and at a
certain point, I remember sitting in the chair and reading some of the bible
and Asimov's guide to the bible, and I was simply unable to keep my eyes open,
and at that point I shrunk down on top of the blanket, and fell fast asleep. I
remember having a moment where I woke up, I was in the chair, and I remember
thinking "I'm awake enough that I am not going to sleep very long," and I had
this momnet as I was going to the floor, and I remember thinking, "that's a
complete lie, I am going to sleep a lot." Well, I did sleep a lot, another
dreamless sleep, and when I woke I realized that it was time to go to Daniel
and Jessi, because they had invited me and Shravik over that day.

Well, I went over to them, and it was quite an interesting visit. Jessi is
pregnant now, they have known since Monday. It was sort of interesting. In the
text, Shravic was talking about doing things, and Daniel said something like,
"Well, for reasons Jessi will tell you when she gets here, she doesn't want to
go too far from home." which I did not want to be presumptuous, but a text like
that means she is probably pregnant. Anyway, I got there and I assumed she was
pregnant, and we went into that, and everything. We ended up going to the
Legacy West mall area to eat, which is a nice area that we have been before. I
got some lamb something in a bowl, and it was tiny as fuck, not near enough
lamb and a lot of cucumbers and shit, for way too expensive. So that sucked.
When we got back to the apartment, we then proceeded to have a very interesting
conversation. We went from Trump, to horror films, to religion, to the
constitution. The point is that it was a very interesting conversation.

I have coffee now, and I am tired of talking about my life. I am not sure what
I want to write about here, but it is certainly not going to be my life. So let
me take my first sip and get it on.
