So this is something that I want to say. When people ask me what religious
affiliation I have, I don't really have a good answer. I'm certainly not
Christian, but to say I am an athiest is a bit misguided as well. The best way
to describe it is that I think that there are mulitple systems of belief, and
that, due to our relationship with reality, in that we simply have experiences
of reality, and we never are confronted with reality "in the raw" so to speak,
we can never truely say which belief systems are the "most correct" and in
fact, I would go so far to say that it's impossible to create something like a
"theory of everything" which aims to give the universal laws which govern
everything, because such a theory is always bound by the constraits by what is
meant by everything, and any definition of everything which is satisfactory in
so far as including everything would have conflicting theories which are more
correct in some circumstances and less correct in others.

But more than that, which is more or less my suspician about how reality is, I
would say that, regardless of whether or not there is a universal binding set
of physical laws which govern everything, we cannot have direct relationship to
raw, naked reality; our relationship with reality is bound to our own
experience with it. So to claim that there is something such as an "Absolute
knowledge" about something is purely absurd, and to treat something as
scripture, or as the "one true way," is misguided at best. Instead, all of the
ways of thinking about things all have varying levels of validity, from
differing degrees, and the level to which different modes of belief become
applicabale and reasonable towards describing our relationship with reality,
and give us the ability to understand and parse out the signals that arrive to
us as our experience will indicate to us to what degree and in what way we
should take those theories as more or less indicating the nature of what
reality is.

Now, when I say this, I usually say it in some way, but the shortest way that I
put it is I say that I believe
