# 20180914
So I have been slack on writing in here lately. It's as if I don't have much to
say.

Well, today, I do have quite a lot to say. The last couple of days, I have only
had dream fragments, but today I had a whole dream process. It was really
something. So let's just get right in to it.

Last night I had two dreams, and they were inturrupted by a brief period of
wakefulness. It was around six that I woke, and I know this even though I had
no clock to go by. But based upon the light and the sky and also my nightly
intuition, I know this to be the case.

Anyway, the first dream strats, or rather, I start remembering it, by walking
into a store. This store is similar to dreams I have had of stores like Sam's
or Home Depot in the past. The place is large. This one also is in a mall. In
fact, now that I think about it, I had a dream a few weeks ago that took place
in a mall off of dream 635, or the dream west side of it. I believe it was in
this mall that I was in.

So I walked in, and I remember going to a section of the store that was "my
apartment." The way it worked in the dream, there was just a section of the
store which was sectioned off for me, and there was a bed there, and maybe a
chair or something, and it was "my apartment." It was interesting, because I
thought of this place foremost as my apartment and then I thought of it as a
store, rather than the other way around.

So I remember sitting there, in my apartment, which was really just a section
in the middle of the store, and I remember thinking, "Hm, I need something, how
about I go and buy it." and so I went into the shelves (I was already sort of
in the middle of the shelves, but I went to the parts further from "my
apartment" to where there were just shelves and not my apartment.) and I picked
up two things from two different places. The first was something related to
pens, and the second I think was related to journals.

Now that I think about it, I was very much replaying the events that happened
to me a few days ago in Office Depot. In parentheses, let me talk about that
experience.

So a few days ago, after I met Liel, I went into Office Depot to buy some
sticky notes. She suggested to me the idea of placing theses sticky notes all
over the things that were the Russian names of the things that I would place
the notes on. She said that this helped her a lot with learning english, and so
I agreed that it was a great idea, and that I would do it.

But I didn't own any sticky notes. So I went into Office depot, and I found the
sticky notes, and chose between all of the options there, and then while I was
in there, I figured I might as well look at the pens.

As I was looking at the pens, I saw a pen that I knew that I wanted. I had seen
it on reddit, and when I saw it, I almost considered ordering it off of amazon
straight up, but I didn't. But now I saw it at the store, and it was just
sitting there in front of me, and I wanted it. I also so some of the cartridge
refills for this pen, so a picked up the pen with the cartridge refills.

Lastly, while I was there, I went to a different part of the store, to see if
there was anything else I just couldn't live without, and I saw on sale were a
bunch of spiral notebooks for twenty five cents, when they are normally three
dollars. Three dollars seemed ridiculous, but twenty five cents seemed
reasonable, so I picked up the maximum, which was six, and with the postits,
the pen, and the journals, I went to the register.

When I got to the register, the man at the register I could tell was being
repremanded for something. The caught the manager talking to him, as I walked
up to the desk, and saying something like, "So you should never manually key in
something, always use the scanner, and if it doesn't work, find an alternate
scan" or something like that. What I assumed happened was, that the man had
tried to ring something up, but it didn't work, so he just keyed in the isbn of
the thing, or SKU, or whatever, and he made a mistake somewhere along the way,
and that was what happened. I presume. Of course, I don't know the reason for
this repremanding of the cashier by the manager, but that is my best guess.

So I get to the register, and I do my best to be genuine with my "Doing well,
how about you," and he said, "I'm well" and scanned my items. As he scanned
them, I know he forgot the pen I had put. He then told me the total and said,
"Insert your card when the scanner shows" and I came to a mental crossroads. I
thought, "I could make this transaction, which was far below the ammount that I
knew it should have been, or I could be honest, and tell him that he made a
mistake in scanning the things, and go on my way."

So at this point, I said, "I think you missed this one." And he looked through
the list of items on the transaction, and he said, "Yeah" and he tried to
cancel and adjust the transaction, but it wasn't working, so eventually he just
creditted the whole thing and started the transaction over again.

This time, I double checked him to make sure he scanned everything, and the
ammount came out to almost double the original ammount, which was much closer
to what I expected the ammount to be.

At this, I payed, and left.

So back to the dream, in the dream world, I picked up the two items, first the
pen, and then the journal in another part of the store, and as I was picking
them up, I thought, "I could very easily just grab these things and use them in
my apartment, since my apartment is literally in the store." But then, in the
dream, I went to the register to pay for them.

So at the register, I remember there being some confusion. This point I think
is not quite associated with the experience at Office Depot. There was a lady
in front of me, and she was quabbling about her transaction, but I think in the
other way. She was the sort of lady that would have a bunch of coupons for
things, and would argue over every little minutia about the price. So as I came
up to the register, I remember being annoyed at this person in front of me.

Now, this point in the dream is a little hazy. I remember the cashier ringing
up my items, and I picked them up. The last thing I remember in the dream is
looking to my left, where the entrance/exit was, and feeling something about
that exit. Either I wanted to go out, but I couldn't, or I didn't want to go
out, but I had to. Or something like that. Either way, this was the end of this
dream.

So the second dream is more interesting, as a premonition of the future. It
will become clear as I tell about it in what way this is the case.

So I forget where this dream starts. The earliest I can go back is to a certain
point. Let me talk about the setting of the dream first though.

This dream took place in the dream version of downtown Seattle. There are a lot
of winding corriders and steep roads in dream downtown Seattle, and this was
the case with this dream as well. So I was there, and I was with Kyle. I know
Kyle was involved, and Evan might have been there, but I don't remember.

Regardless, I know Kyle was there. I remember, at one point in the dream, which
is the earliest point I remember, we went in to a head shop. There were all
sorts of pipes and other things around, and we were shopping there.

In the shop, I remember talking to Kyle, and I said something like, "So what's
your take on this still? Are you still opposed to marijuana? It's entirely
legal to smoke it here, at least for you, maybe not for me."

And Kyle I think mostly shrugged it off and he said, "Haha, yeah, I am still
opposed" I remember pushing it on him again like, "But really, it's totally
legal and harmless here, there is nothing that could go wrong." and Kyle still
said he wasn't interested.

So at this point, I am feeling like I missed a whole section of the dream. It
might come to me, but I feel like, either before this, or before we even got to
dream Seattle, there was a part of the dream thta I am entirely missing, but I
don't remember it.

So regardless, after we got out of the head shop, I remember Kyle saying,
"Okay, it's time for us to go back down to Oregon." Something like that. And I
remember thinking, "Oh, I needed to check if I needed to test today, let me
check. Because whenever we go to Oregon, it will be to late by the time we get
there before we can do anything.

So I checked my phone, and it was between 1 and 2 oclock at the time, and I
thoguht, "With the time change, it's getting very close to the deadline" and I
checked, and I did need to test for the day. So I said to Kyle, who was in the
front seat of the car, and I was in the back seat, I told him, "Hey, so can we
find a testing center, so I can pee in a cup, I need to do this today." And
Kyle said, "No, you should have thought of that sooner, for right now, we need
to go to Oregan, and we will be late if we have to stop." And then I said, "No,
you don't understand, if we don't do this," and at this point, I came up close
to his ear and whispered to him, "I will get convicted of my felony."

And still, Kyle said, "I don't care, you should have figured this out earlier."
and so I said, "No, like, we have to stop, this whole thing is zero tolerance."
Finally, Kyle said, "Okay, well I can leave you here while we go on, but I'm
not coming back for you." And I said, "Well if you're going to be like that,
and push me into that corner, than fine, leave me here while you go to Oregan."
So I got out of the car while they went on their way.

Kyle was driving, and I'm not sure who "they" is, but I know it was they,
because there was someone in the passenger seat.

Regardless, I was now standing in the middle of the dream version of Downtown
Seattle, and I wasn't where I needed to go. So I got out my phone, and I
searched for "Urinalysis" and I found, to my relief, that there was one only a
quarter mile in front of me, just up the road where I was standing.

So, relieved a little, I walked to the place.

As I walked in, I must describe the layout of the room.

So the front door had a short hallway that went into the main waiting room. On
the left end of this hallway, there was a door, which represented the womens
restroom/testing room. The left wall of the hallway went out first, so taht the
waiting area was a big square. So the hallway "opened up" to the left, so to
speak. There were couches and things in the main room, and the back and left
walls of the waiting room were not walls, but large windows of glass that you
could see out. It was what you would imagine a rather stylish waiting room
would be like.

On the right side, there was another hallway. Along this hallway, towards the
end, was the main office, where teh officiator would stay, and to the left on
this hallway was a door to the outside. On the right, there was an "Incubation"
room, which was just a large room with a single table on it. So from the top,
you walk in, then take a right to the main hallway, and then another right to
the incubation room. Then, to your left is the mens restroom.

So at this point, I am a little cloudy on how things go. I remember, there were
two people that were there. There was one woman there rather a girl, who had
black hair, and was a bit gothic in her style. I found her attractive, but she
was the sort that I seemed not appropiate to talk to. The sort that has a lot
of baggage, and I have an instinct to stay away from that level of baggage.

On a side note, a bunch of clients just came in to the break room, and they are
making a lot of noise. It's amazing, listening to this whole thing. I can't
kiss up like this. I don't understand. I am listening to Eric and a client talk
right now, and they are talking about various sports teams, talking about, "If
this guy didn't get injured, this team would have done this thing." It an
interesting dance, these people have such strong opinions about who is going to
win what. This isn't how I see sports.

Really, I am just having a very difficult time concentrating with all of these
people in the break room, making all sorts of noise. It is honestly driving me
nuts.

Okay, so I put some music on now, and so I have deadmau5 in the background
instead of a bunch of people talking about random nonsense.

I could comment on this whole thing, but I would rather not.

So as I walked in to the testing center, and I saw the girl in the waiting
area, and I mostly ignored her, I acknowldeged her presence, but nothing more,
and I went into the main hallway, and I walked my way down to the end of the
row, and I talked to the administrator.

I told him, "Hey, so I know you must not get this much, since marijuana is
legal here, but I need to do some drug testing for it anyway" And he said,
"Yeah, we do that here" and he gave me a cup and a packet, and said "Just
follow the instructions on the packet, and come back to me, and you'll be good
to go."

So I went into the room, and then turned left into the bathroom, and I took the
cup and the packet, and I became quite confused about the whole thing. The cup
had something of a gel ball inside of it, about the size of a raquetball, and
the packet was a small plastic packet, with some sort of liquid inside.

As I began to open up the packet, I wasn't sure what needed to be done, so I
started reading some of the instructions, and I read something about placing
the liquid from the packet untill the whole thing is full.

So I did that, I filled the cup all the way to the top, so that it had the gel
ball in there, and then it was filled with this liquid. And then I thought,
"Well how is this supposed to work, I can't pee in this." So I read the
instructions again, and I realized that the instructions first had you pee in
the cup to a certain level, and then after that, you would fill the rest of the
cup with this packet until it was full. So I thought, "Oh shit, I have totally
messed it up now." But to salvage it, I poured some of the liquid out, just to
the ammount that I thought I would have the right amount of pee, and I peed in
it, and got it full.

At this point, I want to make something that seems like an important
association. Pringles makes these snack sized bunches. Of course, there is the
regular pringles can, but they also have a much smaller version, which is about
the size of the palm of your hand, and stores maybe, let's say, a dozen chips.
It's almost a kid size, but they make this product. The cup was shaped like
this pringles can. On teh bottom, it was curved like the pringles can, and more
notably, the top of the cup reminded me very much of such a container when you
peel the cover off. Whehter this is significant or not, I don't know, but it's
still there.

So after this, I gave the cup to the administrator, and he said, "Okay, we'll
wait for the other one, and then we can go." So I now realized at this point
taht the girl was also peeing in her cup in the womens room. She finished up,
and brought her cup to the table in the room.

The man then took both of the cups, and examined them, and then said, "All
right, you both come back clean, you're good to go."

I think the girl left at this point, just walked out, but I stayed, because I
remember, there was also the test for alcohol that was required, so I said, "Is
this an 8 panel test with alcohol" and the admin said, "It's an eight panel
test, but not with alcohol. We don't do that." And I said, "Oh, because I need
to test for alcohol as well."

The admin sort of sighed, and said, "Okay, we can do that, we have a probe that
you can use. It will be a different test, instead of just using this one, but
we'll get both the eight panel test and the alcohol test done."

We then went in to a bit of conversation, and he said, "We don't usally do that
test, because no one really cares about it here. It's not addictive, we know
that to be true (he was refereing to marijuana at this point) and so we don't
geneally have to adminster this test with this case." I said, "I know, but it's
too hot in Texas for people to realize that, it must fry their brains or
something." He chuckled, and that was that.

So at this point, the whole drug testing thing was behind me, and in the dream,
we went outside, across the hallway of the incubation room, to the outdoor area
that you could see through the windows of the waiting room.

So this outdoor area was arranged like so. Immediately, there was a porch area,
with tables and chairs and all sorts of things that you would expect to find on
a porch. Then, further out from this porch area, the whole thing was situated
on a golf course, and the fairway of one of the holes going across was the
scenery there. Then, further out in the distance to the left, there was a large
mountain. In fact, the entire thing was mountainous in the background, but this
mountain was noteworthy because it comes up later in the dream.

So we go outside, and I remember examining some of the chairs and tables and
things, and thinking about how nice they were.

The entire scene of the dream has shifted at this point. I am done with the
testing and this part of the dream has now gone to something else. If I would
have gone back into the room, it would have been the same testing center, but I
didn't go back in the room and it was out of mind in the dream at this point.

So on the porch, I remember talking with the guy there, and it was Richard, my
uncle, and we began to talk about things in a way. I forget exactly what we
were talking about. I think, it was mostly about how he had created a business,
and I remember thinking, "You can't create a business all by yourself, it had
to have been with other people involved."

As we were talking, and looking up at the mountians, a strong gust then began
to blow, and as it blew, the rocks on the top of the mountain began to crumble
and fall off of the mountain. I remember looking at them, and going, "Wow,
those rocks are so large, I'm amazed taht the wind can make them fall."

At this point, I remember Richards saying, "Watch out, they will come this way,
we can only hope that they don't destroy the building." And the rockes, indeed,
did start to crumbel and bounce this way. They were carrying so much speed from
the wind, that they even bounced on the grass and such on their way here. And I
remember bracing myself for the rocks, being very aware of them, and being
aware of trying to avoid wherever they may land.

There were four of them, and one of them, the largest one, came very close to
hitting us, but in bounced on the golf course, just outside of the porch, and
went over, and then came back down and hit on the other side, so that it missed
us completely.

At this point, I remember say, "Wow, that was crazy, do you have these rocks
hit often" and he said, "A couple times, they have hit, and we've had to
rebuild, but it's part of the deal here."

So then, I rememebr, a stronger wind came again, and this time, a whole
avalanche of rocks, some small and some large, came from the mountains. I
remember panicing a bit, because the rocks were coming like a wave across the
golf course towards us, and the admin said, "Come further back, towards the
building, it will be safer that way." This made sense to me, as the waves of
of the rocks would become more spread out and as you went further back.

So I remember, I ran towards the building, to the right, as far from the
mountain where the rocks were coming from as I could, and I layed down, and
braced myself for the wave to go over me.

I remembber the rocks coming over me with great force, and I remember putting
my back to them, so that they wouldn't harm me.

They came over, and I remember, after the wave was gone, and the wave after
that, I evalutated myself, as I lay there, and I thought, "Am I okay, or am I
dead?" and I found that I was okay, and I determined that it was possible for
me to stand, and evaluate the situation.

Now, at this point, is the point taht I remember the admin reminded me of
Richard, and we may have talked about his business, and I thuoght that it must
have been his business because of the clients he had, and that it was
impossible to make a business on your own. So I may have said some of the dream
out of order.

It was around that point that I woke up.

Interesting dream, because the first thing I did was check to see if I needed
to test today, and I had the suspician that I needed to test, and it turned
out, today is a day that I do need to test. I am at work right now, and I am
planning to leave in just a bit to go test. I just find it amusing.

Now, depending on how the algorithm works, it is very possible that today it
was inevitable that I had to test, because, well, it's the last day of the
first two weeks of the month, and I have to test twich a month, is how they put
it, but if it's not twice a month, but instead, "Once in the first half of the
month and once in the second half" then this is the last day of the first half
of the month that has been for testing.

What I am getting at, is, this is the first dream that I had to test, and it
just so happens that I needed to test on the day that I had the dream that I
needed to test. I just find it so cool. It's fascinating.

Also, as a cute little side note, there was a girl there, in the waiting room
of the place, that had black hair, that was very much like the girl in the
dream. She wasn't exactly the same, as the dream girl was most certainly a
dream girl, but it's quite facsinating to me how the brain is able to come up
with images that are like the images of the people I expect to see.

