# 20180726
So this is a rather strange article to start. I have so many things to write
about last nights dream, about what just happened, about my meditation waking
up, I don't know where to start because I'm afraid I'm going to miss pieces and
then they will be gone forever.

Well, lets start and work backwards. Today, as I was walking in to work, just
twenty minutes ago, I saw Kaley in front of me. She was the topic of the second
dream I had, and so as I was walking, she was quite a good bit in front of me,
and she held the door for me, like, she started to walk in, but she looked back
and saw me there, and she waited for quite a good while to hold the door. And
then she started talking to me. She told me about how excited she was to be
going to Mexico this weekend, she is taking a long weekend, and she is using it
to go to Mexico. And she was talking about these things, and I replied that it
sounded fun, being cordial, but when we got to the stairs, I just turned off
and went up, and sort of cut off the conversation. And as I got into the
stairs, I started saying to myself, like, what the actual fuck. Like, what the
actual fuck. I have a dream, where she is in it, and she is a pretty central
part to the dream, and it's explicitly her in the dream, and in the dream we
were talking about things, and now like magic, the very next morning, we have a
conversation so much like the one in the dream, not the same for sure, but very
similar, with similar sort of mood, the spirit of the conversation was the
same, her talking and me listening, and I cut it off before it was done, I cut
it off, similar to how my parents cut it off. I was blown back by this event,
as I walked by the stairs, I couldn't help but feel completely amazed and
astonished that such a thing would happen, I don't understand it at all. And of
course, there are two main "silly" interpretations to this, the first being
that dreams are divine and that there was divine intervention at play here, but
taht is silly, but the coincidence of the whole thing is wholly remarkable. I
don't know what to make of it. I felt a little bad for cutting her off by going
into the staircase, but I always take the stairs, and well, I have made the
decision earlier on that I won't change that for someone else, and that I will
not let social stigmas bother me. I was slightly bothered by my rude treatment,
I literally just walked into the stairs, and I would have like to continue the
conversation, but it didn't happen like that. Fuck me, I wish I understood what
this means. Oh, and the second interpretation, comperably as invalid as the
divine, is that my subconscious mind knew that this sort of event would happen
today, and my dream was simply the inevitable knowing that this sort of event
would happen. But I don't understand what it means. I am not interested in
Kaley, and though she is physically what most anyone would call attractive, she
is, as I said in the dream, a ditz, and I believe that. Now, to say that I
couldn't date a ditz is one thing, and perhaps that would be the best sort of
person for me to date, and maybe my brain knows that, but there has to be some
sort of equality to some extent, there has to be some sort of mutual
appreciation of the subconscious and the conscious phenomenon, and I have to be
able to discuss that with a potential mate. But I digress. There must be some
sort of repressed feelings, in fact, I know there are, between Kaley and I, and
I have an affection for her in a strange way. She is so unlike what I consider
an ideal human, but I love her for that anyway. Love is a strong word here, but
hopefully the reader understands what I mean by love. I love all things, and
Kaley is one of those things that I see a lot of a certain specturm of love
for. She has a very feminine way of conversation, and of doing things, it's
interesting.

Okay, so enough of that, that happened just this morning and I still don't know
what to make of it. When I woke up today, I looked outside and saw that it was
light, and like I said, I had these two dreams, both of which had a pretty
profound impact on my psyche, and I mostly sort of layed there, realizing that
I probably wasn't going back to sleep, and playing through both of the dreams
in my head, going over them again and again, because I so very much did not
want to forget them. Eventually, after about twenty minutes of laying there,
when my watch alarm went off in the other room, I got up, grabbed my phone and
recorded the dreams in voice on my phone. The telling of both those dreams took
me about 20 minutes. I could transcribe what I wrote here, but instead of doing
that, I will elect to write through them again, because there were a lot of
details to these dreams that are important to me, and these two dreams I want
to have written down for sure in as complete a way that I can. They are so
profound, and the second one in particular had such a huge impact on me, on top
of this incident with Kaley this morning, it's hard for me to take it in.
"There is so much beauty in the world, it's overwhelming, I can't take it in".

After I recorded the dreams, I put some lounge clothes on and went outside to
meditate. I went to my favorite meditation spot, but this time instead of
sitting at the top of the hill, I went to the bottom, at the shore of the lake,
and I meditated there. I went through a lot of things during that session, and
it was a good reset button for me. Before the meditation, I had the inclination
to act on all of my base desires, my base instincts, after those two dreams, I
wanted to declare things to people and to make things known to them, but after
the meditation, I reset, and I came back to myself. I felt my own body again,
and I stepped out of the dream world of my imagination. Meditation is
important, and I will make an effort to practice some more.

So enough of that, let's get to these dreams. In this case, now, instead of
working backward through the day as I have been, I will place the two dreams in
order, because that is the way they should go.

So both of the dreams happened in the dream version of my parents house, which
as I've said before, is laid out in an identical way to the real version of my
parents house. In fact, this dream version was so much like my parents actual
house, that calling it the dream version would be unneccassary, and you could
just say that it was taking place in my parents house. Still, there were some
details about various furniture and things that were like my parents house when
I was a kid more than things are arranged now, so that is different, but for
the most part it's exactly like my parents house. So the first dream begins,
and I am in our schoolroom. This room is probably the least like anything that
the schoolroom has ever been, it was mostly empty, and there were some sitting
areas on the back wall next to the window.

(A breif aside here, Caitlin just messaged me asking me to look into something,
and she hasn't done that in multiple weeks. What the actual fuck is happening)

(I will resume this after I look into this, hopefully it shouldn't take too
long.)

There are four main scenes, I invoke the demon, I encounter the demon in the
study, the demon swallows us all, I reflect on the demon in the backyard, and
then I capture the demon, then the epilogue, where the demon jumps out of the
closet, and I hold it.

The second dream, the outline goes, I host a party, I talk with someone in the
kitchen (I forget that part at the moment) I talk with Kaley in the chair, my
parents wake up, I storm through the house, I drive off.

God, fuck me, I am getting so discombobulated by this issue, Caitlin always has
the most obscure issues that deal with the most obscure shit, and I don't want
to deal with it right now. I want to write out my dream, but I can't fucking do
that in peace. I have some consolation that I have the dream spoken out on my
phone, and that version you could say is pretty raw, but I want to have an hour
of uninterupted writing, and now I'm just sitting here like an asshole waiting
for Caitlin to answer my damn question about her issue.

I'm about to lose my fucking cool with Caitlin, this is so interesting. Like,
this dream is seriously having a profound effect on me. I'm going to go outside
and scream when I'm done with her.

Okay, I'm back, and I'm better. I have solved Caitlin's problem, (and fuck the
way canadian taxes are handled in Alliant, like fucking seriously) and I came
back from BJJ.

I want to go back into my dreams, as I am afraid the magnitude of them is
escaping me, but I can't quite get back into that mode at the present, so
instead I want to talk about my experience with Skyler today. Skyler is a
beautiful soul. I love him. He is a wonderful human being. I was the only one
to show up today at lunch class, and he was teaching, so I got what was
essentially a private lesson from him. We played with that Kimura grip, and the
whip around to the back, and then also two other things you can do based upon
how people react to that kimura grip. It's classic Skyler stuff. More, what I
want to write about him, is after we were done, and we began talking about
stuff, he asked me what I do for work, and I told him that I am a software dev.
And he started asking about everything. He mentioned that he wanted to get into
it, but he wasn't sure the right avenue for that sort of thing, and we talked
about that some, and I asked him what he does, and he mentioned that he did
training at the four season, as well as some customer service type positions,
and other things, and that he wanted to "get into programming" and asked what
my opinion on the best way to do it. Well, I said that I wasn't the best person
to ask there, and he asked me how I got into it, and if there was a learning
curve for me, and I said that no, there wasn't a learning curve for me, that I
was always facsicanted with the maths and sciences, and programming was sort of
a natural extension of that interest. Regardless, we talked for a bit more, and
eventually we parted ways, and I made it back to work.

But here is the thing. I was entirely over my anger after this "private lesson"
with Skyler. It's an amazing thing, that people like this can have on the soul.
Part of it is my attitude towards life. Being a perpetually hot-headed child,
and giving myself in to that path of nihilism for so long as I did, and being
blessed enough to see it to it's inevitable conclusion, and then being able to
claw and climb my way back out of it, and continue to work on a better way of
living, all of that has given me an aptitude for recognizing these moods in
myself, and knowing at least intellectually, even when the emotions want to
take control, that those routes are not healthy to go down.

I have not been that upset in a very long time. It's been a very long time that
I've been so upset that I have to excuse myself from a situation and take some
breathes. Part of it was my desire to write out these dreams, and the
inturruption by Caitlin with this tax issue gave me a sort of denial. Like, I
wanted it to be an easy issue so I could go back to the dreams, but looking
into it for just a bit, it was clearly not, and my frustration generated from
my dream, compounded by the fact that I couldn't even write about the dreams
without being inturrupted, it created such a strange effect, that I have felt
before, but that I thought I had matured past, but clearly I have not.

Regardless, let's get back to the dreams. So as I was saying before I was
inturrupted, this first part of the first dream, it started in the school room.
And as I said, the schoolroom was the room in the house that was the most
unlike any iteration of the school room that it has ever been. And I remember,
the first thing that I wanted to do was to let out this demon. Now, this is the
interesting thing about this dream. As I was letting out the demon, or rather,
as I was deciding to do so, I knew what the demon was, what it was like, and
what it would do, and I knew how the dream would go from there, for the most
part. It was like I was putting in a movie, and I knew the subject of the
movie, and I knew how the movie ended, but I wanted to watch the movie again
anyway. And that is how this demon was summoned. I took a book, and I opened
it, and out of it came the demon.

I will now do my best to describe the demon. I have, even still, a pretty clear
vision in my head of what the demon looks like, and I will do my best to do it
justice. So the demon was knee height to me. It had two hind legs, and two
distinct arms, somewhat in proportion to human limbs, but the demon was
equipped to run on it's four limbs. It was most like a lemur, now that I am
able to come up with an animal. I think a lemur is the best analogy for this
demon, at least as far as body dimensions go.

Now, the demon had fur. It had hair, also like a lemur, and it had mostly black
fur, except it had some patterns of white fur amongst the black fur. I am
trying to remember exactly where the white patterns were on the demon, but my
imagination is interfering with my memory right now, and I don't think I will
be able to get it. The key point here is, the demon had a very pale face, a
very human like face. The face was in proportion to the rest of it's body, but
it was like a wrinkly old man. It reminds me a bit of those books that have a
face coming out of them in the movies, kind of similar to that, but very
sinister, and way more animate than that. And none of these things seemed out
of place, the way I am describing them makes it sound like "a lemur with a
human face, how funny that would look" but if I had skills with drawing, I
could draw it, and it would not look funny, but instead it would be something
natural. To talk about its face, I imagine the best way to describe it would be
as the old wise monkey sage that exists in monkey movies, with the hair in
appropiate sagely places on the face of the monkey, but this would be a younger
version of that sage, very alive, and very animate. That is the best I can do
without dwelling on it longer.

Something also, this demon had a tail. This tail was not like a lemur tail, but
instead was shaped like one would expect a demon tail to be shaped. It wriggled
like a snake, and had an arrowhead like ending on the end. It was pitch black,
and was stiff, like a wire. If one were to grab the tail, I could garuntee you
that it would create an extreme reaction out of the demon, and nothing good
would come of it.

To talk a little bit about the personality of this demon, it was a very
playful, and sly demon. As you will see as I describe the dream, the demon is
verying cunning with his words, but at the same time he is very playful. He
likes to joke and play with his prey, and the whole thing is like a fun game to
him.

So I let out the demon. I must remind you, that I was not doing this for any
reason other than "to watch a familiar movie again". As in, I knew how to re
capture the demon, and that was with the image of a girl bouncing a ball
robotically up and down, which I will describe in it's proper place, and I was
more doing this out of intention to let the demon free, and let what happens
happen, rather than for any other reason.

In fact, it is very difficult to describe my exact motivations by what they
were. I think this is the case because I had no motivations to open the demon.
It was just something that came to me as something that I wanted to do, similar
to how one could say "I want to watch Movie X" and place movie X into the
player, and watch it for the next two hours. That person might have seen that
movie before, and they know how it ends, but for whatever reason, they just
decided, "I want to watch that movie right now," so they put it in and watch
it. It was the same for me with this demon. I sort of just decided, without
dwelling on it or having any real reason, that I wanted to summon this demon,
and I knew how to capture the demon once it was out, and I knew the personality
of this demon, but similar to how someone watching a familiar movie might see
something or have some effect to their psyche after they watch a movie again, I
had similar sorts of effects on me.

I have not ever explored this demon in dreams before, and the notion that I
knew this demon and what he was about and what he would do and how to recapture
him was one that was isolated to this particular dream experince. How I knew
these things or where they come from I do not know.

So after the demon was summoned, I summoned it by openning this book, and the
book open, and there was a bit of a dramatic entrance by the demon. The image I
remember from the dream is of a lifeless body of the demon coming out from a
sort of smoke and light show coming from the book, a very dark smoke and light
show, not overly dramatic, and not accompanied by any sort of music other than
the sounds of smoke and light, whatever those sounds are. And out of the smoke,
there was this lifeless statue of a demon, almost like it were a pelt, a
stuffed animal, that one would have proped up in their room if they were a
lemur hunter. Well, this lifeless state only lasted for a breif moment, and
before the smoke could even clear, life instantly sprang into the demon, and it
very breifly looked around before it laughed and scurried off on all fours. And
when it scurried off, I immediately left the room and went into the kitchen
where my parents were.

When I made it to the kitchen, I made them aware of what was happening. I told
them, "Listen, just so you know, I have summoned a demon, so be careful." And
they had a sort of indifference to it. It wasn't that they couldn't be bothered
by it, or that they weren't afraid of it, but they more brushed the topic away,
almost as if to say (although they did not really explicitly say anything)
okay, well, thanks for letting us know, and why did you do that, and I assume
you're going to take care of it. And they said all of that with their body
language, with the way that they continued on sitting at the kitchen table, and
continued on with their business. I have not totally captured their meaning,
but I think that's about the best I can do. So I then mentioned that I am
pretty sure the demon is in the study, and they said, "okay, we'll be here,
thanks for letting us know" in that same sort of way that I described, and so I
made my way, after letting them know about the demon, into the study.

I wish I could recall exactactly what happened in the study. I went in to the
study, and mostly what I remember was looking around at all the corners of the
room, mostly the ceiling corners, looking for the demon. And I remember getting
glimpses of it, but it was definitely scurring around the room, and it was able
to hide itself behind the different furniture and things in the room, and it
was constantly escaping behind furniture, and then coming back into my view.

Now, this is the point that I don't remember. I know we exchanged words back
and forth, but I don't remember what the words were, or what they were related
to. I might listen back to my recording of this whole thing and see if there is
any insight there, but I don't want to do that right now. The biggest thing I
rememebr is that the demon was playing a sort of hide and seek, and I kept
trying to find it, but it kept appearing in the places I wasn't looking, and
when I would redirect myself to look where I saw it, it would manage to scurry
around again and appear in another unexpected place. It was toying with me, and
it was being very playful when it was doing so. You can imagine a scene in a
horror movie where the bad guy is saying "come out come out wherever you are"
to the protaganist who is looking for them.

Anyway, the demon eventually reveals itself to me, and I do remember that it
startled me a bit, sort of like a jump scare, but in a different way, like I
knew he was going to reveal himself to me, I just didn't know when. I do
remember being quite scared and apprehensive to do anything. I remember there
was the scene then, after he had reveal himself, he was trying to swallow me,
and I had managed to avoid his swallow, and he stood almost with a sinster
laugh in the middle of the study, and I knew that trying to confront it was not
the proper thing to do, and I determined that this little game we were playing
was done, and that it was time to go back into the kitchen.

So I exit the study, and I go into the kitchen, where my dad is actually in the
seat my mom usually sits in, and my mom is in Evan's spot. There is no
significance to this, as we would often sit in the "wrong spot," when it's not
dinner time, and this is what they were doing now, they were just sitting in
the spot that was most convienient to sit.

So I exit the study, and observe the demon sort brooding in the study there,
and I knew it was going to give chase to me. So I go back into the kitchen, and
as I come out, I give my parents the update, "Okay, so I have found the demon,
it was definitely in the study, and now it is giving chase to me." and my mom
in particular was really scared, especially when the demon came out somewhat
menecingly, at least, menecingly to our vision, it was just the way the demon
walked to the demon, but regardless, it came out and stood there looking at us,
still being playful, but this time instead of being deceptive, it was sort of
just brooding there, and even making some faces that you could call funny
faces, not silly faces, but faces that in others contexts might be considered
funny. And I remember my mom being scared, like, "look at that, what are you
going to do with that thing, it's going to swallow you!" And I said, no, look,
it is warded off by my attachment to my father.

And this is the part of the dream that I find the most profound, (well, there
is a lot about this dream that is profound, but this is one of the profound
things that I don't fully understand yet). What I did, I noticed taht my mom
was right, and that the demon was preparing to pounce, but I noticed this, and
I began hugging my father, almost embracing him, from the side, covering his
arms with my embrace, it was not a mutual embrace, but more the embrace of a
child who clings to his father. And my father, I remember, was still there, and
he just sort of sat there, like he wasn't sure what I was doing, but since it
seemed to be working, he decided to just sort of sit there.

And that did in fact ward the demon off. It was still ready to pounce, but it
was very noticable that it became apprehensive at my embrace of my father. And
we were safe from it for that breif time.

However, this was ruined just moments later by my mother. She immedietly, as
soon as she realized that the demon was benig warded off ran to us, to embrace
myself and my father together. She surely did this with the intention of "being
safe with us" but I knew this was the wrong thing to do, and as I saw her
running to us, I said "No don't, it will just swallow all of us if you do
that," but she ran to us anyway, and embraced me around my father.

Well, as soon as she was embraced with us, the demon grew extremely large.
Rather, I should say that it's mouth became extremely large, it's mouth began
to open, and until it turned into something that wasn't even like a mouth, it
was more like a funnel, a funnel that, when you looked into it, led into
something akin to infinite darkness. Now, if one were to have looked at this
from the side, looking at it from an entirely emperical point of view, this
mouth was indeed like a giant funnel coming out of the place where the mouth of
the demon should be, but looking into it, it was like the entire thing was not
part of the demon, but instead part of some infinite darkness. It did not lead
to anywhere except darkness. Eternal darkness. And so this demon opened up it's
mouth in this way, and it became very large. I would say that the opening was
about 7 feet in diameter, so it stretched from the floor almost all the way up
to the ceiling, but not quite. It was taller than all of us for sure. And
attached to this newly openend darkness, was the demon, and it was pouncing on
us, and it came up over us, with the funnel of it's newly opened mouth pointed
downward, and it came down onto, over us, and engulfed us in darkness, for a
breif moment.

As soon as all of this happened, I did not have time do anything, but as soon
as it began to engulf us, I disattached from both my mother and my father. I
looked to both of them, particularly my mother, and I explained to her, "when
it was just me and dad, the demon could not get us all, but when you joined, it
could get all of us, did you not see that?" and my mom just looked back at me
sort of dumbfounded.

Let me clarify at this point exactly what happened so that it is clear when I
read it back. The demon engulfed us in the darkness, but before it could I let
go. When I let go, the darkness dissappeared, and the demon was gone as well,
but I knew that the demon was still around. So it was sort of in that darkness
that the demon was able to escape from us. It's something that doesn't make
sense if you were watching the scene from the outside. From the outside, it's
unknown whether the demon went poof, or whether it put the darkness over our
eyes. I'd say the best way to describe it form the outside would be that the
mouth/darkness funnel came over us, and fell all the way through us, and it
looked as though the demon went through the ground. But that's not what
happened. That's just the best way to describe it. Really what happened is that
the demon engulfed us in darkness, and I was able to deny our full engulfing by
removing myself from my parents, and the demon had managed to scurry completely
out of sight of all of us in that moment of darkness that we had. In fact, it
almost did feel like the demon "went through us" and into the ground below, but
I again must emphasize that that is not what happened, and just that it is the
best way I have to describe what really happened.

So I knew I had to act fast. After my breif exchange with my mother, I knew
that I had to capture the demon again. And I was comforted with the fact that I
knew how to do it. But at this point I knew that I had to reflect on it, to
make sure that both I knew how to capture it, and that capturing it was the
best thing to do, so I went outside, through the living room, out our back
door, and into our backyard.

Now, the backyard was still also very much like the actual backyard of my
parents place, but the swing set was still there. That swing set was only
removed a couple of years ago irl, but in the dream, the swing set was still
there.

So I went outside, and I walked onto our porch, and went to the right towards
tho swingset. The swingset was there, it was a square frame, with legs on each
side, and I was facing the opening of it. On the other side of the swingset is
our fence, the fence to our backyard. In between the swing set and the fence,
the demon stood there. It was not moving, it was standing on its two hind legs,
and it had its hands crossed in front of itself, similar to how someone
standing might rest their hands in front of themselves and it's head was bowed
down towards the ground, as if it were waiting for something there. I walked up
to the swingset, but I did not go through it, I went right up to it, but I knew
that I shouldn't go through it. I stood there, and I looked at the demon, and
at that point, I reflected. I was very calm at this point. I reflected on the
demon, on it's nature, on what it was, and I reflected on how to capture it. At
this point, I got a very clear vision, (a vision within a dream, how strange a
thing) of the girl bouncing the ball, up and down mechanically, and I knew that
this girl was what would capture the demon. I then looked at the demon, and I
stared at it, trying to gauge it's intentions, and I knew that he was almost
trying to coerce me, to tempt me, to walk under the swingset. And I will say, I
was drawn to walk under the swingset, with the notion that, "the supersition of
walking under the swingset is silly" but I knew that it was more than just
superstition telling me to not walk under the swingset, so I denied my
rebellious attitude in that moment, and I went back inside.

I knew where I had to go. I went back to the school room, and near the book,
the book I had used to summon, I found a doll. This doll was like a rag doll,
that they sell, not like a barbie, but very much a girl doll. With this doll,
there was also a ball that I found.

Now at this point, as I was gathering the doll and the ball, and I was
arranging them in the way that they needed to be arranged, the demon had
followed me, and was standing outside the doorway to the school room. I just
now put together, that at this point, the demon was always standing on the
other sides of doorways, and almost as if it could not cross them, and was
staring at me and almost trying to entice me to do so.

Anyway, with the demon standing there (and this time I was not at all enticed
to cross the doorway to the demon, I was too focused on the doll and the ball)
I placed doll standing up on it's feet on top of a small piece of wood, and I
raised up its right arm to be parallel to the floor, and under it's right hand
I placed the ball. I dropped the ball and it hit the wood and bounced back up,
and with my other hand, I moved the hand of the doll up and down to keep the
ball bouncing, almost as though I was playing with the doll, and almost as if
it was the doll that was bouncing the ball like a basketball. After only a
couple of bounces, the doll started perpetuating the bounces on it's own. This
doll was like the scene in a wrinkle in time, where all of the girls are
controlled by the overmind thing or whatever, and they are all bouncing balls
in unison with eachother, with a extreme amount of roboticism, but in this case
it was a doll, and it was just one of them, and I started the motion of the
bouncing and the doll continued it when I let go.

When I let go, something I didn't quite expect happened. The result I expected,
but the way that it happened I didn't expect. I was look at this whole thing
with a sort of curiosity, and as I was watching the doll bounce the ball, I
noticed that the doll got larger and larger, as did the ball it was bouncing,
but it was doing so in a very uniform way, and the mechanicalness or roboticsm
of the way it was bouncing the ball didn't change. But as the doll got larger,
it became less and less doll like, less ragdoll like that is and more "lifelike
doll" like if that makes any sense, and the demon, the lemur there, who was
staring at the ground to the school room, and he as completely still, and still
life like, but as the doll got bigger, and less ragdolly, the demon started to
become slightly smaller (remember it is a small demon, about knee height to
begin with) and more and more ragdolly, and by the time the doll reached it's
full height, the demon had become a complete ragdoll, to the point that I knew
that it had lost all of it's abilities to be lifelike at all. The "soul" of the
demon was still in the ragdoll, though, but it's ability to do anything in the
world was trapped.

So at this point, when the demon had fully transformed, I crossed the door to
the demon, and I picked it up, and I looked at it. I took it, along with the
book, the doll, and the ball, and took them all into the closet, and I put the
book away with the doll and the ball, but the demon I still had in my hand, I
as I started to put it away, I knew that it was not wise to hide it in the
closet with these other things.

At this point, as I'm putting all of these things away, my parents came into
the school room, on the other side of teh doorway between the closet (which
this school room closet in the dream was like a walk in closet, which is unlike
IRL) and I heard my mom say, "why are you keeping that ragdoll, just put it
with the other things and keep it in that closet." I knew that that was wrong,
but I put the doll there with the other things, because I knew that it was not
going to do any harm in the immediate, and I had the very strong intention to
go back and grab it.

Well, I did not put the demon ragdoll fully away, but instead left it in the
box with the other things sort of like it was sitting on the edge of the box,
and I walked back into the room.

And I said to my parents, who were both there "I think it is wrong to hide that
demon there, I think I should keep it" and my mom again said, "Why would you do
that, why would you keep such a thing as that, just be rid of it, keep it
hidden in the closet" and as she said that, the ragdoll demon came flying out
of the closet as if it were catapulted. Now, I want to clarify, there is not a
catapult in the closet, and the demon had not "regained it's ability to move"
as in, the demon itself did not propel itself on it's own. But still, however
this happened, it happened, and the demon came flying out of the closet in an
arch, and it landed at my feet, literelly to the point where I could just pick
it up, and hold it. So I picked it up, and I said, "see, it should not be
hidden away, it should be held out like this where everyone can see it." and I
gripped the demon ragdoll by the waist, and held it out for my parents to see.

That was the ending of that dream. Whether or not it goes into the next dream
fluidly, would actually make some sense. I do not remember waking up at all in
the middle of the night, but these dreams were definitely seperated by a rem
cycle for sure. In fact, I can say with confidence that this dream does not
lead into the next one, as my parents in this dream

So I'm back now, I have finished work and arrived at home, and I ate some food,
and I am feeling very pressed to do all of the things before I go to bed, but
there is simply not enough time in the day to do things.

So I want to try and ease myself back into the mindset of the dream. Like I
said, this dream was not connected with the dream before it, and the themes
presented are very different than those of the past dream. Indeed, if I were to
write a story with these two dreams, I would have the main character of this
dream have with him a sock puppet, that he has, showing the sybolism of the
demon that he contended with in the dream before, but it's not a novel, and
that is not what happened.

There was also a lot of allusion to this dream in the previous entires of my
journal. I have not gone back and listened to the recording that I made this
morning, and it is well over twelve hours since I woke up. I will plan to
listen to it after I finish talking about this. I will have to come up with a
Russian story to share, so that Liel and I will have some bad Russian grammer
to talk over. I am very nervous about our meeting, but she was enthusiastic
about making contact with me, so I will do my best to rise up to the occasion.

Anyway, enough of that. I want to go back over to the dream. I made a lot of
references to this dream in my journal, and indeed, for the better part of the
morning, I seemed to be acting out almost exactly the feelings and emotions I
had during the dream. This is fascinating to me, as it's really difficult to
say which came first. Of course, the dream came first, but how much
pre-suppostion about what was going on did my subconscious brain know, and how
much was the emotions that I was going through in the dream acted out in my
later life? Were these emotions brewing in me, and my dream self had to act
them out as a sort of premonition of what my day was going to be like?

It's hard to have an answer to these questions. The pragmatist in me says that
all of these things are simply a subconscious manifestation of the knowledge of
things that my conscious brain does not know, and that is the explanation of
the events, but there are a lot of coincidences between the dream and what
played out that it's hard to deny that a supernatuaral interpretation is not
wholly unreasonable. I do maintain my position though, that the appeal to the
supernatural indicates a sort of weakness of man to find the "path of least
resistance" in discovering the truth of a matter that he does not understand,
and I surely do not understand what happened to me today, last night and today.
To appeal to a supernatural source, that would be the cheap way out.

Well, enough ado about it, let's talk about the dream.

So the dream started, and I was in the living room of my parents house. The
layout of the house was similar to the layout of the last dream, although now
that I think about it, the only common element of the main "scenes" of the
dream is the kitchen, and mention of the schoolroom is only alluded to but
never visited in the dream, so I find that interesting. Even the kitchen is
approached from the other angle. Perhaps this could indicate that both of these
dreams, together for a sort of yin and yang, that they are two aspects of the
control I have on my life and the things in my life I have insecurities of.
That is an interesting interpretation, the implications of which are well
beyond my present understanding. In fact, I could just be making associations
in the effort to seem profound, while really I'm just spewing a bunch of
nonsense, although when one has a dream, a pair of dreams, such as these two,
that have such a profound effect on the waking life, any association
discovered, as long as it isn't patently absurd, should have some merit.

Anyway, this dream begins in the living room. In the living room of my parents
place, I am hosting a party. I very much know I am the host, as I am walking
around from person to person, being cordial to them, making sure that they are
having a great time, offering drinks all around, and the like, doing "hosty"
things.

At this party, I know are at least Caitlin and Kyle, who are both in the living
room. The living room has been turned into a sort of make shift dance floor,
and I know Kyle and Caitlin are both on the dancefloor, dancing, and they are
having a grand time together. They are not dancing with eachother, or at least,
they are dancing with everyone else as much as everyone is dancing together.

In the rest of the room, there are a few more dancing people, some people on
the couchs, couples paired off and cuddling togethre and sharing drinks, and in
general, the scene is very much like one of the parties that I might have
attended while I was in college. It was not overly cliched, like you would see
in a college frat movie or something like that, but it was the sort of party
where there was music and dancing and drinking, and everyone was having a good
time.

So as I make my way through the living room, making sure everyone is having a
good time, I then make my way into the kitchen. Now, at this point, I would
have to go back and listen to my recording to know who it is I am talking too
in the kitchen. I do not think it was Kaley, but it might have been Kaley at
this point. I know we were talking, and in fact, the more I think about it the
more I am convinced that this was Kaley.

So I am standing on the table side of teh part of the counter that seperates
our kitchen, and Kaley is standing on the other side, and she is not drunk, but
certainly she has been drinking, and it's very clear that she is thinking
through things while she is drinking. And she starts to talk to me about her
boyfriend. At this point, I feel it is important to also say that irl, about
say a month ago, she talked with Caitlin about her boyfriend, whose name I
don't remember, maybe Justin, although I might be confusing that name. Joe, Joe
is his name. Anyway, she was talking about how he was having commitment issues,
and how she was asking questions about where this was going, and he was being
wishy washy about it, and etc etc. and she wasn't sure where they stood. She
was telling this to Caitlin in the break room, about a month ago, but I was
there making tea or something as well, so I sort of became a part of the
conversation, but only a little bit.

So this was the point we were having in the conversation. She was saying how
she was considering (in the dream) of breaking up with Joe, and she wasn't sure
what to do, so she was looknig to me for guidance. And I remember a moment, I
was standing on the table side of the part of the counter which divides the
kitchen, and she was standing on the other side, and she started to sort of
just collapse into me. In fact, I think at this point we had alerady gone.

This is why I am not convinced that she was the one I was talking to in the
kitchen, because the timeline doesn't match up. I remember having a
conversation with someone in the kitchen, but I entirely forget who it was. And
it was a decent conversation. For the sake of moving forward, we will pretend
as though this conversation happened. I do have a vague recollection that this
coversation was about how great the party was, and she was telling me that I
was being a good host, which I accepted graciously.

So after that, I went into my parents bedroom, through the dining room, and I
saw that the partying was dying down a litte bit and people were starting to
pass out, as this party was intended to be a sleepover, and these people had
designated areas where they were to go to sleep.

At this point, I am pretty sure I am naked, or at least, I don't remember
whether or not I had clothes on at this point, and I was certainly naked later
in the conversation, so I can only presume that I was naked at the start of it
as well. My nakedness comes into play later, so it is a relevent subject.

So I go into my parents room, and I see Kaley, and she is sitting on the
otoman, and me, being the sly host that I am, decides to sit on the chair
opposite her. And this is when she starts talking to me. I will be entirely
honest, this conversation is pretty one sided, she is doing most of the
talking, and I am doing my best to be a good listener. And she starts talking
to me about her boyfriend, and she goes on about how things aren't working out,
and everything like that, and she starts to aske me for guidance, on what she
should do. Before I can reply in answer in any way, she sort of collapses in
the chair next to me, like "what should I do!" in one big exasperated sigh, and
I pick her up, and sit her in my lap.

I know I was nervous in doing this, but I knew it to be the right thing to do,
and I didn't want to betray myself by giving in to my base instinctual desires
here, so I was very cautious, but not hesitant, in showing this gesture.

And I just say something like, "Sit here, get comfortable, and just get it off
your chest" or something like that. "I'm here to listen." And she continued to
talk. And as she sat there, I know I wrapped a blanket that was there around
us. I also know that I started to develop an erection. In fact, I think the
erection was already there, because I was aware of it as I was setting her in
my lap. But Kaley I know, she sort of arranged herself on my lap, and she sat
so that he back was to me, so that my erection sort of went up her tail bone. I
don't know if she was naked either. If she was, it was only in relation to her
tail bone. In fact, when I have to think about it, I think that she was wearing
only panties, but thinking harder on it, I can't say anything about what the
panties were like, except that they were somewhat modest, at least more modest
than a thong. But like I said, I have to think really hard on it, so I believe
it is my imagination playing here, and not my memory. The one thing I do
rememebr very distinctly is that she sat in front of my erection, on teh side
of it closer to my knees, and that my erection sort of came up along the base
of her spine. And so we arranged ourselves like this, me making sure not to
betray myself by acting in an wholly reprehensible way. In fact, I was
genuinly interested in listening to her, and the fact of my erection I mere
made not of, not out of shame, but out of the fact that I didn't want it to
betray my interest in listening to her. Which is why I made sure that it went
behind her, and she leaned a bit against, and we were abel to cuddle in that
way under teh blaknet as she talked about things.

Well, we were having a pleasent conversation, and I do remember my mind
drifiting a bit. In fact, as interested as I genuinely was in the conversation,
my mind kept drifting to my insecurities during th ewhole thing, so much so
that those things are what I remember rather than the actual conversation she
had to say. I remember thinking "is this going to lead to sex," and I hushed
that thought as wholy undesirable, and I remember also thinking, "does she have
the impression that I want to have sex with her?" which I also dwelled on for a
bit, but I felt insecure about. Besides that, mostly I was trying my best to
hush my stupid and repressed thoughts about false perceptions of sexual desire,
in favor of truly trying to understand and connect with this human being, but I
was being betrayed at every turn by the sexual things that were happening
there.

At around this point in the dream, my parents, who I knew were sleeping, begin
to wake, at the sound of Kaley's voice in the conversaiton. They wake up, and
they are both sort of groggy, and they ask first, "who is that there," and then
after they deduce that it's me, they say, "what are you doing, why haven't you
gone to bed." To that, I said, you're right, we should go to bed, and I said to
Kaley, "let's go into the schoolroom". Well the schoolroom door was closed, and
I knew that no one else was in the room. And at this my insecurities were
still flaring themselves, but I must remind the reader, or maybe say for the
first time when I should have set it before, that I was not outwardly acting or
making to life my insecurities. On the contrary, I was being what I would say
was quite smooth through the whole thing, bringing her to my lap, maneuvering
her around my erection, and making it known to her but not letting it intrude
on her, and wrapping a blanket around the both of us to keep eachother warm.
All of these things, I was doing in response to the feedback I was recieving
from this dream Kaley, and I was being very successful at making her feel
comfortable to open up and talk to me. All of my insecurities I had in the
forefront of my mind because I did not want them to betray how smooth I was
being.

So at this, I did mention that we should go the school room, and the insecurity
of, "she might think this is a ploy to get it on with her" was no the
expression of that action, but instead I was mostly just suggesting the
schoolroom so that we could be alone and continue on with this conversation
which I was finding pleasent, and in the schoolroom we wouldn't have
inturrputions. So of course, I thought that, "this could be very much seen as
having ulterior motive." but I had the most pure intentions with the action,
and with every action leading up to that point.

The women reading this might say, "no guy is ever that pure" and that is the
source of insecurities. It is the fact taht, I try and do things that seem pure
to myself, but will not be seen as pure by others. That, and I also have those
insecurites because secretly I know there is a part of me that is not pure, and
that part of me could easily rise up in such an occasion and take control when
I don't want him to. I have been mastering my control over that part of me
lately be abstination from masterbation, but that is a recent endeavor, and I
am only what, I month and a half into my probation now? There is a lot more
probation to go.

Anyway, at this, at my mention that we should go to the schoolroom (which might
be connected to the demon of the previous dream, but I will leave such analysis
for later) my parents instant said this. My father spoke up, and said, "No, you
are not" and I looked back at him and said, "What?" in a very authoritative
way, not wavering at all. I was genuinely upset at this. If he had not replied
to my "What?" as he did, I could have very easily defied him, but his reply was
this. "This is my house, and you are not taking a girl alone at night into a
room alone when you are in my house." To that, I got very angry.

At at this point, I had a moment. The moment was, I saw my father was being
very cool about the whole situation, and I had a moment. I saw that my anger,
my flare of emotions was wholly my own, and that to escalate the situation,
that was on me. And I did a quick double take. I thought, "I could find a way
to handle this situation cooly, or I could flip out." And it was because my
father appealed to the sense of ownership of what happens in his house, the
sense of authority there, that I knew it was unwise to go against his direct
word like that when I was in his domain, when I was in his house (and a line
like that is something like my father has said to me before in relation to
other things, "Not in my house your not" is a typical dad line), it was because
he said so as the primary figure of authority in that domain, and I knew it was
true, as such, that I was indeed in his house, and that a firm rule like that
should not be gone against, I had decided that I had already lost at that
moment, that I decided, "I will escalate this situation". It was a very strange
moment to have in a dream. To have the self-consciousness to be aware of
something like that is very much an intellectual pursuit, and to have that sort
of intellectual knowledge in such an emotianl moment, in a dream, I feel must
indicate something.

So I went off. I got up, almost tossing Kaley aside, not concerning myself at
all with her anymore, and I started yelling. Full on yelling. Stuff like, "What
the fuck!" And "You think I'm not an adult! Fuck you, and fuck you too" I would
asy to my father, and then to my mom when I realized she was agreeing with the
decisions of my father, and not only because my parents do a very good job at
not publicly showing their disagreements, but also because I could tell that
she truly had the same belieef that I shouldn't take a girl to another room
alone.

I honestly don't remember what sort of vurgarities I screamed at them. I
probably said something also to the effect of "this is why I am like I am,
because both of you wish to supress me in this way, it's fucked up, and you are
fucked up parents for doing it". It's been a long time since I've had a thought
that violent towards my parents. It's honestly quite amazing to me, that I as a
twenty seven year old man can still have such strong feeling of resentment
towards my parents, and I still on some level deeply resent them for raising me
how they did. I have been making great efforts to forgive and to move on, but I
don't know. I know definitely that my dad feels repentance, and certainly my
mom as well, but I think it is the sort of repentence like, "Well, we see that
you have resentment, and we can see the results of the way we raised you" but I
feel that maybe it is not full repentence. I have forgiven my father, both
inwardly and to him actually, using the words, "I forgive you for that" but
clearly there is still more forgivness taht needs to be done, and this dream
indicates to me that the repentence, it's maybe not there. I don't know, I
don't have the wisdom to see it, and I can only visit them more and do my best
to have the conversations that we need to have, but Luekemia makes that
difficult.

I'm reminded of a quote of mine. "My relationship from you as parent to child
lasted twenty six years, and died then. The relationship we have now, of me as
an adult taking care of you, that relationship is still in its infancy." That
is the noly thing, for me to try and cultivate the relationship of adult to
elderly, and that is on me. It's one hundred percent on me.

Anyway, shrink session out of the way, and back ot the dream, after yelling
things such as that to them, I storm out and go back into the kitchen to get
some food out of the refridgerator. As I storm, I am not yelling or anything,
but I am noticably storming, and the people in the living room who were
sleeping from the night before, notably Caitlin and Kyle, they begin to wake,
and in their groginess, they see me. I wholly decide to storm through to the
kitchen anyway, and somehow, through the miricale of dream worlds, my dad is
already there. This isn't a surprise to me. As I go to the fridge, I say to
him. "You know what, maybe I should fucknig thank you, Kaley is a ditz anyway,
so maybe you saved me from that." And I said it with the most distaste one can
possible give. My dad looks at me, and then looks at the hallway through the
dining room that I just walked down, and I said, "She's right there isn't she."
and she walked in.

Now, I do must say, she was not noticably upset, and I was at a loss at what to
say. On the one hand, what I said I wholly thought was true, and since I am
being totally honest with myself, that is something that I have thought about
when I think about Kaley. But saying something like that, it is meant to label
people, and people always take it as labeling, where as when I say it, I always
mean it in a nuanced way. I never use absolutes, but when absolutes like that
come out of my mouth, I myself know them not to be absolutes, but I know taht
they will be received as such, and any attempt to try and recover by saying, "I
don't meant that absolutly," is also seen as disengenous and cowardly. So I was
sort of at a loss, because on the one hand, that is honset, but on the other
hand, it is not honest in the ways other people would receive, and trying to
explain that distinction to someone, especially a woman, who has just received
such an insult in that way, will only serve to insult them futher. I knew all
of that in that moment, so I sort of stared there, in my stormiy and upset way,
and I sort of just thought, fuck it, let her be upset that I insulted her, I
would rather he be upset than to back away from my honesty.

So I walked away from that situation. I might have said something like, "I wish
I could apologize for those words, but I honestly can't, so for that I'm sorry"
something like that. And walked away. She did not break down, or anything like
that, I think she was more stunned and shocked than anything. Well I wasn't
waiting around to find out, because I had already decided that I was making my
way the fuck out of my parents place. And on the way out, my mom was standing
near the kitchen table, and I had to go by her to get to th efront door where I
was going to make my exit, and as I walked by her, I said, "I know you won't
believe me when I say this, but I did not intend to have sex with her in the
school room." and my mom started trying to speak in reply to that, but I told
her to stop, and that I was leaving.

I walked through the living room, and on the way out, I don't remember if Kyle
and Caitlin, I think they had already left, and I remember seeing the empty
sleeping bags that they had slept in, and I thought, "my anger has driven them
away" and I thought that it was only natural, as my anger had driven even
myself away, I wanted to get hte fuck out of there, and why wouldn't they? It
was only natural. So I walked out the front door, and got into my car. As soon
as I got into my car, I sped off, I slammed the accelerator, and I drove to the
corner, which is only like 20 feet, at full accelerator speed. And as I was
taking that turn, and there were parked cars that I was wholly aware of that I
could run over if I was not careful, I said to myself, "It's okay, you can calm
down now, you're not in the presence of you parents so you don't have to act
upset anymore." But I was stilly upset, I certainly was not acting upset to
make some sort of point, I became upset and chose to display that in the most
immature sort of way. So I continued down the road, and I turned right on yale,
and right on apollo, and I was still going fast, but starting to cmoe to my
senses that I was being dangerous, so it was the forefront of my mind that I
was being dangerous, and that I should try and calm myself down for my own
sake. It was around the point that I was crossing plano road (which all of this
was still uncannily similar to real life) that I woke up.

Now, I will say, at the point I woke up, and I believe I already said this, I
did not have an erection. I was wearing boxer briefs that night, and I am
unsure if I had an erection during the actual dream. It's unknown. What is
known is the profund effect that this dream had on me.

That, on top of the fact that I was still processing the dream as I was walking
into work, and she stopped to talk to me, and then that conversations was cut
short by myself, and then later that day Caitlin messaged me with her problem,
and I nearly lost my cool, all while I was just beginning to write about these
dreams, it's so insane, and the fact that I had hadn't been able to process the
dreams yet, they were so profound, and I needed to process them, and I aws
being inturrupted by a stupid canadian tax issue, and I was becoming
increastingly upset at the fact that I had'nt processed the dreams, and the
reason was because I had an obligation to work, it's so uncanny to me.

One last thing I will say is, the driving away while upset was very much
analgoulous to me driving to BJJ at lunch. And I did talk about the amazing
sort of effect the soul of Skyler had on me at BJJ. And as I was driving, I
thought, "this is just like the dream, only the dream ended just as I was
getting somewhere new, where as I'm not going to wake up from real life, I will
discover what that something new is. And it was a sort of private lesson from
Skyler. Such an interesting set of dhreams, followed by an extremely
interesting day. I am fascinated by this.

Now, I have it in ym mind to come up with a Russian story, but it is nine at
this point, and I have to get to bed. I do not know when I am going to come up
with a Russian story. I will sit for a bit outside right now, and let the
mental exhaustion of this whole writing session wear off. I will do my best to
come up with a story, and to at least write down some sentences that are beyond
my comprehension. So enough of that, it's out there, the day is done, and I am
so very glad that I was able to get both of those dreams down to their
completion. So very, very glad. Life is good.

