So last night I had a rather complicated dream about my Anima (or at least I
think it was) but when I woke up, I thought to myself, "This will be a
difficult one to remember" and while I do remember most of the ending of the
dream, the whole sequence leading up to it is a bit obscured. But I'll do my
best to work through it.

So the dream begins in a house. It's hard to describe this house because it
doesn't resemble any house I have been in before off the top of my head, and I
haven't been in this house in previous dreams. Actually, the layout of it is
similar to Jason and Lacey's house, except the front door is where the backdoor
is, and the living room/kitchen area is not as big or pronounced in the dream.

Something also to note is that this dream is set in the 1880s. I don't know why
that is, but that decade is very prominant in my head as the decade of this
dream.

So I walk in to the house with the intent of killing someone. He is sitting in
one of the bedrooms. This is the part of the dream that is a little hazy. In
this part, I think the intent is to either rehearse, or reenact, or in some way
practice the killing of this man. And since I know it's a rehersal, or
whatever, I decide to, in this case, not kill him here but instead take him
outside.

So we go outside, and we walk around. There is an old town, and then, there is
a place like a futuristic ball-park. I take him there, and I remember trying to
talk with him for a bit. There was someone else there, and that someone else
asked me who this was and what I was doing here. When I explained to him, he
informed me that this needed to get a move on.

Something weird I remember at this point had something to do with a dozen or so
versions of this character. The character in some way split into a bunch of
different iterations, and I had to kill every one of them. It was something
where I just remember this sort of image.

Anyway, after that was done, I went back to the house. When I got in there,
there was a girl there. This is the girl that I think in some way represents
the anima, although I could be wrong. Anyway, when I got in, she asked me what
I was doing, and I said that it was none of her business, and that she should
mind herself.

I went in to the other room, and I went to kill the man, and when I did, I
killed him in the stomach (with an antique gun I think) and his top half was in
some way seperated from his bottom.

When this was happening, the girl who confronted me at the front door was
following me. She was on to me and what I was doing, and when I killed the man,
she said something like, "Ah, I knew it, I knew this is what you were here for,
you just had to do this didn't you."

She then took me, with someone else, like a right hand man for her, and both of
them forced me at gunpoint into the living room. I was wearing a fancy 1880s
suit as well, and she started frisking me down, looking for weapons. She took
off my jacket and started patting me down under the arms and such. She was
being erotic about it, but I was mostly concerned with thinking about some way
to escape, but her right hand man was honed in on me, and I couldn't do
anything. She then unbuttoned my pants to check, exposing my genitals for a
moment. I then made a comment, "Why don't you go ahead and suck my dick while
you're at it." She licked the tip playfully, and put the head in her mouth and
sucked for a bit, before she put it away, and put my pants back on. I remember
when she did that, I remember thinking, "This isn't where this is going, is it?
She seems legitamately interested." I guess, what threw me off is I was
expecting her to, at best, make a sly comment, but this sort of playfullness
was unexpected for the situation.

Regardless, after she put it away, I remember saying something like, "You know
it had to happen, if it wasn't me, it would have been someone else." She said,
"I understand, and you must know that because it was you, I have to do this
now." Then she said, "He's not carrying anything," and then she shot me.

I'm pretty sure it was her who shot me, and not her bodyguard. She had a rifle,
similar to the one I used.

I remember, for a breif moment after she shot me, the sort of "my life flashed
before my eyes" thing happened, and I saw the man I killed, I saw the
consequences of "that needed to be done" (whatever the hell that means) and I
felt like, "Well, this sort of shit happens" as I was shot.

I woke up, and immediately realized that this dream needed to be written down,
but that it would be hard to do that due to the nature of the dream. I've
written it down as best I can remember.

The second dream I had was reconnecting with Tim Franda. The most notable
thing about this dream was the starting location, being in that futuristic
train station place that I've had other dreams, and then as we caught up, he
asked me about my job and I told him that I've been working there for a year
and a half now, and we walked through the city, which had roads like stair
steps paralell to eachother, and we got to an apartment which was like a room,
with a door to the left like the old school camp that led to a balcony, and we
went in there, and I asked him how he was doing. That was the extent of that
dream.

--

So right now I want to write, but I don't know what I want to write about.
Everything seems like something that I don't want to write about. I could make
up some story about a guy who does something at some point and something
happens and stuff goes places and then he learns something about what this or
that means about the meaning of why he wants to do the things that he does in
his day and age of his existance on this planet, but mostly it just seems like
writing about it isn't going to grant me any sort of understanding about him or
his motivations or his actions in doing anything at all which will help me
understand something about myself in any way. It would just be a dude doing
things, and I don't want to write about a dude doing things.

Something also I have mentioned in the past is that I have a hard time coming
up with a story that I feel connected to. Any story I come up with neccesarily
feels like it should come to life in a better way as art, like animation or
even just drawings or something, but even then, I'm not particularly skilled at
those things to embrace the quality of what it is that I am trying to draw. So
instead I just end up writing something that I feel does an inadequete job at
explaining the animation of the thing that I really want to act out. So that
seems wrong as well.

As I was writing, I was thinking about something else, but I don't remember
what it was. It was something like, "Oh, I could write about that, but I need
to finish this sentence before I go on to that." It was probably something
about one of my stories or something, but I don't remember it anymore, and so I
suppose it will just have to stay locked in the void of infinity forever. It's
gone for good, I'm afraid.

I could write about the maiden of truth. I tried my hand at poetry, and it
worked pretty poorly, if I do say so myself. Well, at the very least, I have a
really difficult time getting a sense of meter or rythym when I write poetry,
because I have a tough time getting the syllables of the words matched up with
the meter in a way that makes lyrical sense, and when I do that, I come up with
some awkward ways of saying what it is I was trying to say.

Something I have thought about is making a sort of "Tongue in Cheek" narrative
style, where the action of the story is told in more of a first person view,
but where that first person narrator is someone who is detached from the story.
So it might be a story being told by someone.

The thing about this gimmick would be, who is this person? Perhaps it's someone
who was involved with the story, but more what I have in my mind is that this
person is me, and I'm providing my own commentary on the story as I am bringing
it to life. And the reason I say it would be tongue in cheek would be because I
would make commentary about the gimmicks or the cliches of the story as I am
writing, and as I am writing, those things would come out as things, and I
would say things like, "And since this is a fairy tale, there must be some
ordinary object with an opening that allows our hero to enter into the magical
realm. And sure enough, he opened of his bed trunk, and when he reached in grab
his toy, he was pulled into the fairy world. And since every fairy world needs
a gripping and compelling name, this one was named Asglarf" and so on.

I want to do this because I don't want to take this fairy world that I create
to seriously. Like, I have the fear that if it's taken as an actual fairy
world, similar to Narnia or Phantases or some other crazy non sense world, and
if the tone of someone's journey into that world is serious, then people,
children in particular, will read that story and it will possess them in ways
that can be quite harmful. Granted, perhaps one could argue that being
possessed by fictional stories is better than not having a imaginative outlet
at all for a child, but I think that being possessed to a point of wanting a
place that is most definitely false to be real, while it could be an indicator
of compelling storytelling, is also a dangerous forray into the world of inner
which divorces itself from a reasonable relationship with the actual physical
world around us.

And I say this only because, the times that I have been brought into a world
that I wanted to be a part of, it is always a negative experience. It's the
most frustrating sort of feeling. On the one hand, you just want to be taken
away from this world, and you want to live your life in that one, with all the
cares and responsibilities of that world, which are probably more interesting
than the real world, to be the only things that you have to worry about. And
when you get to that point, you will obsesses over it. Or at least, I do. I
obsess over this world, I think about it, and I grow resentful towards the
world we do live in. I harbor resentment towards the actual physical world. The
greatest downfall of the human condition is that we are able to imagine worlds
that are so alluring and charming that we would like to escape this world so
that we may live in that one. And the truly insidious thing about this is that
those charming and wonderful ways of living are entirely impossible, they are
completely unsustainable. They operate on a level that this world just simply
cannot sustain. But we can imagine them, and a child, when captured by the
splendor of such a world, will want to escape this one, and go to that one.

But the true tragedy of it all is that the beauty of this world becomes lost.
There is so much in this world that is beautiful. In fact, the fact that a
completely innocent, newborn being can become so enticed by a ficticious world
to go to the extent of entirely immersing his or her self in that world, and to
try and act it out in an entirely futile and frustratingly impotent way, to
dress up, and make stories, and actually learn facts about that world which
don't correspond in any way to the actual facts of the actual world, the fact
that this is a phenomenon that occurs to us as human beings, is, in some way,
beautiful. Of course, it's tragic, but I contest that the definition of beauty
should encapsulate the whole range of human experience. The way that something
can be beautiful can be pleasant in some cases, and woefully tragic in others.
But the beauty is not in the fact that it is tragic, but in that, when
something is tragic, the experience that is felt can be called similar to the
experience that is felt during jubilation. It covers the whole range of human
experience, and it's that experience which is beautiful, even tragically
beautiful in some cases.

But I digress. My whole point is that futily trying to escape into some
ficticious world is entirely an unpleasent experience to me. And the beauty in
that is the fact that it is futile and unpleasent can be seen as in some way
beautiful.

And I want to get back on track, but this is a point that I strongly want to
make, is that the beauty I'm talking about is not malicious beauty. In other
words, the beauty that I'm talking about is not the beauty of the pedophile
that penetrates a little child, it's instead seeing that there is a tragedy of
life, and the pedophile that does that is in some way revealing the whole of
life, and entire spectrum of suffering, of pain, confusion, and of malicious
self-pleasure. In fact, I might argue that the image of a pedophile in the act
is in the sense I am describing beauty, an extremely beautiful image. It's also
horrifying, and disgusting, and reprehensible, and entirely unethical and wrong
for him to do that, but it's the whole cocktail of all those things that allows
me to make my point.

And at this point I want to make something abundantly clear. I am not condoning
the act of child molestation. Instead, what I am saying is that there is
something beautiful about the tragedy of that act. It's not beautiful in the
same way that a sunset is beautiful, at least, not in the sense that the sunset
is not also accompanied by such strong emotions that are associated with "bad
things." But it's instead the fact that there are such strong emotions that
occur in coincidence with the act of molestation that makes it something
beautiful.

So, one last thing before I leave this topic, I do believe I am gerimandering
the definition of beauty here. People would usually use the word beauty as a
synonym to pleasent, or fair, or divine, or some other such word. And I am not
using beauty in that sense. But beauty to me means something entirely
different, and much deeper, than those surface level positive emotions. It
means, "That which resonates with you on some level." It's a tricky thing to
put your finger on, but it's there.

Regardless, all of that to say that there is something beautifully tragic about
the child that reads a story, and wants so desperately for that story to be
real that he begins to act it out. In fact, I'd say that is quite possibly one
of the greatest signs of not being able to grow up, and the greatest lack of
maturity, is to be so entranced by these stories that they take hold of your
life, and you spend your entire life not seeing the beauty in the world, but
instead blinding yourself to the imagined world of the story that you so
desperately want to be real.

It's so interesting to me that this happens. And it doesn't even just happen in
religion. It happens in fiction too. How many teenagers wanted to learn the
magic spells, to dress up like Harry Potter, or Hermione, or Ron, or Snape, or
Dumbledore, and pretend to make spells in the way that it is described in the
books that rowling wrote? What would compell someone to do something like dress
up in a ridiculous robe, wave a wand around while chanting a nonsense phrase,
and pretend like those actions caused a transfiguration of a bar of chocolate
from a candy bar into a frog?

It's a deeply troubling phenomenon, and one that I am unable to make sense of.
I suppose that what I can't make sense of is that, when people try so
desperately to make something real, and then it doesn't come to life, they
don't stop "wanting it to be real." In other words, at what point should one
take the feeling of wanting a fictional world to be real and transfer that
desire on to discovering what the real world actually is?

I see the train going like this. Someone reads Harry Potter, and they love it.
They read the pages, they imagine the world in their head, and they are
captivated by the world that Rowling created. Then, when they close the book,
they are still imagining the world of Potter in the real world. But their
experience doesn't match the world of Potter. They aren't wizards, there are no
wizards, and they aren't being swept away by Hagrid into a wizarding school
where they can learn magic. But they want that to happen. Their life pales in
comparison to the ideal of Harry's life, the world around them seems boring in
comparison to the world of Hogwarts, and they don't want to accept the fact
that the world of Hogwarts isn't real.

Possessed by such an enthralling imagination, they try and act it out. They try
and live there life in a way to make the world that is so appealing to them
real. They see the real world, and they make actions to try and make the real
world more like the imagined world. They wear robes, they carry wands, they
learn enchantments, and they make believe that the world of Harry Potter is
real. In some ways, the world becomes more like the world of Harry Potter when
this is done, but in the way that they are trying to do it fails.

And it's when this make believe fails, and the way that the make believe fails,
that is truly tragic. The tragic part of it is not that the make believe fails,
the tragic thing is that, even when it does, when it fails in the most
fundamental way, people will still cling on to the make believe to the point of
denying the real world. The two options are to continue to pretend that the
make believe world is real, and to continue to act as if the make believe world
is to come into being, or to accept that the make believe world isn't real, and
focus your efforts on integrating yourself in the real world. The second option
hurts, to let go of your fantasies, but it certainly beats the first option,
which is to forever be trapped in a continual spiral of attempting to make
something that isn't real "more real" and to continually fall short of that
make believe reality.

It is better to accept that such a world is not real. Such possession is not
healthy, or at the very least, letting go of the possession once you have
realized that it has hold on you is healthier. But it's difficult to let go of
it, because, if the make believe world were somehow brought into existance, if
you could open a portal into another dimension where you could crossover into
the fictional world that you have brought up in your mind as the fictional
reality, if you could go there, it would be a much more fun and exciting place
to live than the world we live in here. You can imagine all of the things you
would do, and you can imagine all of the people you could meet, and you can
imagine all of the fantastical places you would visit. And since that world is
so appealing, some people decide (or at least, their subconscious decides for
them) to stay there, and pretend about it, and imagine about it, rather than
accept that this world is what we live. They would rather spend their imagining
their life inside of the ficitional world than try and integrate themselves in
teh actual world.

And that's where I am. The actual world is harsh, it's rough, and integration
into it is extremely difficult. The troubles and difficulties that so many
human beings have today are only a different variety of the troubles and
hardships that living beings have had in the past, but there have always been
difficulties and hardships towards a living being integrating itself into the
world around him in a harmonious way.

But regardless, I think that is the reason I want to write a story in this sort
of satirical narrator perspective. It's because I don't want to escape into
some fictional world. I think that is wrong. But regardless of that, I think
there is something to be said for playing out scenarios in a fictional setting.
The number of times someone has said, "I felt a disturbance in the force" when
they talk about a premonition of something bad happening, and the utility of
using a statement like that to help understand what's going on, I think goes to
show that fiction can be a powerful force which could be used aid in our
understanding of the world around us. It's just when someone actually acts out
star wars that we have a problem.

So I think this sort of perspective on story telling could lead to me writing
interesting stories about what I want to write about, but it allows me to do so
in a way that I can bring them to existance without the requirement that you
suspend disbelief, or that you have to imagine a world where this exists.

I think the best example of satirical writing that I have encounterd is the
hitchhikers guide to the galaxy. To a point, the writing of that book became
tiresome, because everything was some absurd example after another. It was a
bit monotonous, when everything is saterized in that way.

I think his voice, though, was the best voice that I have heard in this
"satirical narrator" way.

I think the big difference between what I am saying, and what Adams was saying,
is that the whole point of Adams was the satirical narrator. The entire book
was something of a gag. It was taking something which is usually taken super
seriously, as sci-fi usually is, and twisting it into something so overly
satirical, and it is the juxtoposition of those two views which was the purpose
of what Adams was trying to do.

I suppose I'm thinking more along the lines of Rick and Morty, particularly
those parts of Rick and Morty which introduce meta-humor. I want to create a
world, and have features of the world which are ridiculous, and then I want the
characters to bring up how ridiculous they are, but then just have the narrator
wave that away. Something like that. I want to do something like this with my
Rape of the Maiden story. Something like this.
