# 20180828
So last night I had a rather extensive dream, but it will be difficult to write
out for a couple of reasons. The first reason is because, I remember throughout
the dream, or rather, in the dream fragments that followed the dream, I
remember there being a lot of checklists, something like, "I must do these
things" and I would get through part of the list, and each point made sense to
me, but I of course can't remember the list at all. So all of the points
regarding lists and such will be lost.

Well, I think that's the only barrier, and that has more to do with the dream
fragments than it does to do with the actual dream itself that I had.

So the main subject of this dream is myself, with Laura Chambers, aka Laura
Bryer, on a trip to an ultimate tournament. This trip, now that I think about
it, is very similar to our trip to Nacogdoces, except, as you will see, it is
quite different.

So, the dream begins, or at least, I remember it beginning, with our trip on a
flight. We were in the typical dream version of an airplane. I have a dream
version of an airplane, and this is it. I don't want to describe it, because
really there is not much to describe about a dream airplane that is much
different from the non-dream version, the only thing is that there are more
dividers between sections, similar to first-class to the main cabin area, but
just more.

Anyway, in the dream it was me, Laura, and Kyle and Evan were both there, but
they were silent and just following us the entire time. These were the primary
players in the dream, and it didn't change much at all throughout.

So we were on the flight, and I remember going around the cockpit, and being
angsty, and not sure what I wanted to do. Then I remember Laura saying
something like, "Look, I'm going to let you have sex with me when we get to the
hotel, it's okay." Something like that. So then she instantly became the
primary object of the dream, and looking towards the sex was the primary driver
of the dream.

I do remember, as I was going through lists and things in fragments before in
this dream, I kept waking up, so this was possibly my subconscious way of
getting my mind off of things and keeping myself asleep.

Anyway, I remember at that point I started to settle, and sit next to Laura on
the flight. I took an interest in what she was doing. She was playing some
mindless game, some sort of soccer video game, similar to the Rocket Racers or
wahtever it is called, but I remember, she asked me if I wanted to play, and
that it was a two player game, but it was one at a time. So I said sure, and I
took the controls for "A turn" whatever that means in the context of this game,
and handed it back to her. And I remember, when she was taking her turn, I
started to take my hand and place it between her thighs, not touching her
vagina, but rather close, towards the sensual part of the inside of the thighs.
I remmeber her then leaning her head against my lap at this point, and we
adjusted to become more sensually adjusted to eachother on the flight.

It might have been at this point, or it could have been later, I don't remember
when it happened, but I remember thinking, "Isn't she married now? How is this
going to work if she is married?" And I remember thinking like, "Maybe she has
an open marriage, or something, I don't know. This is strange" But I didn't
dwell on the thought and didn't bring it up at all.

Again, I forget at what point this thought came into the dream, but here seems
like an appropiate place to put it.

So in the classic dream way, I don't rememebr landing the plane and getting off
of it. The next thing I remember is being in a rental car, and driving up to
the hotel that was to be our hotel. I remember, Laura walked in first, and we
put our things in, but we didn't go in to the hotel, we mostly just checked it
to make sure it was okay and well, and then went back out.

At this point, I want to say something about the environment we were in at that
point. The hotel was in the middle of the desert. In fact, the entire town was
in the middle of the desert. But the hotel was somewhat secluded from
everything else. It was wide open desert if you were to look out from the front
of the hotel, or from the back of the hotel, it was wide open desert both ways.
The direction our room was facing was from the left side of the hotel, and
looking that way, off in teh distance a bit was a small town, the kind of town
you see when driving through el paso or wherever. Then, on teh other side,
there was something more of an industrialized society, but still, it was pretty
rural, certainly not a big city.

So this was the scene. We put our things in the hotel room, and Laura decided
to come out, and we went to explore. It was probably at this point actually,
that I satrted thinking about the marriage issue, because it was at this point
that I remember thinking, "Well, we are at the hotel, but we are not having sex
here yet. Hmmm."

I want to say, and this is very hard for me to write out or admit to myself so
it must be significant, is that Laura was in charge, she was leading the way.
At any point, I might have been able to alter the course of where we were going
or what we were doing, but she was leading the way of where to go and what to
do, and I wasn't objecting for two reasons, first being that I didn't know or
care what to do and second being the obvious of I wanted to get into her pants,
and have sex with her, so I was doing whatever she wanted.

So we went to the right area of the hotel, and explored a little. I think I
remember, this place reminded me somewhat of "The outskirts of Seattle" which
has been in other dreams, but it was certainly not that dream location, it just
reminded me of that location in a lot of ways.

I forget what we did in this area, we might have gone to a restaurant and
gotten some food. I think that was it actually. I don't think we had gotten any
food, but as we were going and decideing on a place to get food, and we had
decided on a certain place, and we were getting ready to enter, we were
inturrupted by meeting other people on our team, who mentioned at that point
that the hotels only had one bed, and that it wouldn't do for their sleeping
arrangments. We then discussed amognst ourselves, what that would mean for us,
and whether or not we were okay with it, and I said I sleep on the floor, so as
long as we have one other sleeping on the floor, it should be okay. Laura I
think then said that she sleeps on the floor as well, and that it should work
out for us. At this point, I remember being glad, for two reasons. The first
was the practical reason that we had figured out our sleep arrangements, and so
we didn't have to mess with changing hotels or anything like that. The second
reason was, well, I was having doubts the entire time about whether or not I
really wanted to have sex with Laura (she is not very attractive IRL or in the
dream) and I wasn't sure and I thought, "Well, if she sleeps on the floor as
well, we have at least the beginnings of chemistry." So I was gaining a little
bit of solace in that fact as well.

Well, we went back to the hotel at this point, to figure out the sleeping
arrangements. (We didn't figure out teh arrangements right then and there, we
figured them out as we were going back to the hotel). And when we got back to
the hotel, I don't remember exactly what happened. I remember there being
something that happened here, but I don't rememebr what exactly. It had
something to do with another car, and they were in our way, or something like
that.

Regardless of what happened here (it was nothing significant, the most it was
was an exchange of words and even then it was not that significant) we made it
back to the hotel, and from there, Laura decided that it would be fun for us
all to explore the other side of the city, the side facing our hotel.

I remember her saying, "I am going to drive around, and if you see anything or
anywhere that you want to stop, just speak out." And so we drove around, and
before we drove for even five seconds, Kyle spoke out, "There" and pointed to a
man that was selling candies. I remember being annoyed at this, and Laura might
have been a little annoyed as well, but she didn't show it, and so we went to
this man. We were there, and we bought from him a sleeve of candies. They came
in a canister, and in the canister were maybe five of the candies there.

I remember after we bought them, Kyle took them and tasted the first bite, and
then Laura took one, and passed them to me. I remember asking, "Are these
candies or are they something like Ecstasy, do we know?" and Laura said, "They
are candies." Still though, I said I didn't want to take the risk, as I would
have to drug test.

After this, we continued driving on through the town, through the downtown
area, and we made it to a field. At the field, there were many members of the
team Bohica, which was the team we were playing on, and there, we came across
Tim Records, who was playing on the team, and he informed us that there was
pick up going on this night before the tournament, and he asked if we wanted to
join in. Laura said she wanted to, but I wholly did not, first for the reason
that I was still concerned with "Exactly when are we going to have sex" and
also because I just didn't want to play pickup ultimate. 

But that was where the dream ended, I remember, the other team pulled the disc,
and they were running down the field to play defense, and I thought, "fuck it"
and got on the field and started playing.

That was it, that was the dream.

Something of note too, I want to make sure of two things. First, I want to make
sure that my watch still makes an alarm, because this is the second time in two
days straight that I have woken up after the alarm. I want to see if I am
sleeping through it now, or what is going on.

Second thing, I want to turn the alarm off again, and continue to wake up with
the circdian rythym and with the sun. It is so much better to do it that way.

So I might come back and write more later, but that was my dream.

I remember after I had this dream, I took great care in remembering it when I
layed there.

So I feel a lot better today than I did yesterday. I got some better sleep at
the very least, so I don't feel awful, and I have a better feeling of something
like, well, that maybe life is worth living. So that's good.

I drew something yesterday, and I don't know where it came from, nor do I know
what it means. It was a spider descending into a venus fly tray, under which
was an upside down tree underground, with some snakes and some cloud pattern
type things. It was very trippy, and reminds me very much of some of the work I
created when I would get really stoned in Seattle, and draw whatever came to my
mind. It's been a while since something like that came out of me, a very long
time in fact, and well, it was at teh point where I was trying to get to sleep,
but I just couldn't. I was trying to watch some Rick and Morty to lull myself
to sleep, but that wasn't working at all, so instead I went back into the
living room and sat in the chair, and as I was sitting there, I thought, "I
want to draw a spider" and when I drew the spider, the rest of it just sort of
came out. I don't know what any of it means, but it surely means something.

I am still missing something. I don't know what it is. I am greatly missing
something. As I was in the shower this morning, I had a sort of revelation that
it's not that work doesn't challenge me, but rather, it doesn't stimulate me
creativily. I have to use other outlets for my creativity, such as this
writing, or my lit analyzer, or something like that, something else to say, "I
created something" and with that I am able to create this outlet. But it is not
right, it simply isn't right, because associated with this outlet is guilt,
guilt that comes out and reveals itself to me in my dreams. So many times I
have had these dreams of guilt, and inadequecy, and other such associations,
and all of theses associations are generally tightly wound with work, and this
guilt comes out in dreams, and it's unfortunate. That which I use as an outlet
for something that work does not provide for me, that becomes my a source of
guilt. That is wrong.

The analogy is this. My mind is like a waterfall, constantly flowing with
ideas. When I work, this water fall has to be damned, and redirrected, to flow
into a pipe. But it always overflows, and so instead of daming and stiffling
and redirecting the waterfall into the narrow pipe, I instead open up the
levies, and let the water flow as it will. And when this happens, the water
flows as it should, but it flows into a pipe that has no other end. I have
widened the pipe, and let the water flow into it, but the pipe doesn't lead to
anywhere.

But if I don't redirect it into this pipe, then the water will stifle, and
become stagnant, and disgusting and gross. That cannot happen. But instead,
now, the water is not redirected into work as well as it could.

This analogy is rather garbage. I don't know what to make of it. But the point
remains. This outlet, this outlet of writing, and the outlet of this wider
pipe, that the overflow of water can go into. Because if it doesn't if I let it
just pile up, and stagnate, then it will not flow anymore, and it must flow.
The water must flow through me. I am alive when the water flows, and when it
doesn't then I am dead.

I want to talk a bit about philosophy.

I have to leave now though, so long.
