# 20180719 Dream My dad walks - I forget my shirt at work - Dream of the drug addicts in the elevator
So today I have something of a funny story to tell, something that could be
seen as a prophecy of one of my dreams from earlier, but really is just a funny
story. But before that I want to talk breifly about the dreams I had last
night.

So last night, I had a pretty continuous dream, from what I remember, but I
don't remember much of the actual dream. I remember really two moments, two
lines, and then I remember what most of the rest of the dream was about. Well,
I will say that most of the dream was about the concept of living with my
parents, but living in a different room, in my own space where I had my own
control over things, and I was wrestling with the idea, in the dream, that, if
it's my own room in my own space, how is it any different living with my
parents than it is living in an apartment entirely on my own? And I believe it
was Kyle who was talking about this at first, and he was making the argument to
me very logically, and I was conceding the fact that he was making logical
sense, but I knew that somehow there was a fundamental difference, and a lot of
the dream was spent in angst in that room, reflecting on this sort of thing.
That was the bulk of the dream, and one of the moments, the second and less
significant one, had to do with this. Now, there surely is something quite
enlightening to be had there, but I don't remember what else much happens in
the dream. Something I will say is that "my parents place" was really very much
like my apartment in college, but my parents were living in a "master bedroom"
of that apartment. It was a lot more like my dream version of my apartment, and
the whole landscape was very much like the dream version of school, with
waterview drive having this whole scenic overlook and everything. So that was
something to note, but beyond that I honestly don't remember much from the
dream except the first notable thing, which happened at the beginning of the
dream.

The notable thing was this. I know the scene was, my mom was at the stove of
my childhood home, and this version of my childhood home was a bit different
thematically than my childhood home, but structurally it was about the same. So
I was in this home, and I was standing near the pantry, which I'm not sure was
a pantry, but is where the pantry would be, and my mom was cooking something at
the stove, and Kyle and Evan I know were there, although they didn't have any
lines or anything, they were more just a reflection of me there, where as my
mom was not and she was more doing her own thing. So I am having a conversation
with my mom, about what topic I don't know, and as we were having that
conversation, my dad walks in through the front door. And this dream was very
striking to me, because it is the first dream with my dad in it, of late, which
was actually truely a premonition of him post hospital. He walked in, and he
was wearing the knee braces, but beyond that he had nothing for support, so he
was wobbly, but not so wobbly that he had to hold on to things, and he started
walking to us. And I remember thinking at that moment, "wow, he is walking very
well." and such, and I just sort of looked at him in a bit of amazement,
thinking that it's amazing how quickly he has been able to regain his health
and his walking capability. And he walked up to the room there, and he made
some comment, something like, "Well, what, did you think I wasn't going to get
better?" or something equally rough like that, and I said, "No, I just didn't
expect you to get better so quickly, it's amazing" and he sort of scoffed at
me, and we went back to our conversation. It wasn't long after that that left
my mom and dad, and went to my room in the house there, and it was then that my
mom and dad became not features of the dream but instead more like the
landlords of my apartment, and also it was then that the place transformed more
into my apartment like in college. And when I say transformed, I mean more
transformed in a dream like way that makes sense in the context of the dream,
and something more of a natural expression of the state of the dream, if that
makes any sense.

So yeah, enough of that dream. I do want to talk about my little incident this
morning, which I find quite amusing. So I woke up today in the sort of usual
way that I wake. I woke first at 7 (which is really 6) and I remember thinking
that I wanted to get up a little early so that I could get ready for work a
little early and be a touch more relaxed. So eventually, I got up at my usual
time of around 7:35, and I took my shower, brushed my teeth, and etc, and as I
went to evaluate the gi situation, I remembered that I had incidentally left my
gym bag in the car last evening when I got home from work, so I decided to put
my underwear and undershirt on, and some pants, and go outside and retrieve the
bag, come back up, and then resume with my morning routine. So I did that, I
put underwear and undershirt and pants on, and I went outside, and I got my gi
bag, and I came back up and I went on with my morning routine. So I rotated
some laundry, grabbed a gi, put it all in my bag, and I grabbed everything and
went on my way to work. It was not until I got out of my car at work, and
started walking towards my office from the lot, that I realized that I had no
shirt on. I literally made it all the way here wearing just an undershirt,
without a shirt on over it. Of course, I felt quite silly, and I immediately
evaluated my options. First option was, "Do I have a shirt in my car?" and I
immediately scanned my car in my minds eye and determined that no, I did not.
Next option was, "Should I go back to my apartment and put on a shirt?" and I
debated doing this, but I very much didn't feel like driving another thirty
minutes just to get a shirt. It seemed like such a trivial thing. So then the
next option I thought was "Just own it and go to work wearing just an
undershirt" and I immediately thought of my dream a couple nights ago. And I
determined, "This is not the dream, in the dream I was naked, and this is just
a shirt." but really it is quite the same as the dream. It is something that is
not at all a big deal to me, but would be a big deal to others if they knew
about it. It's the exact scenario of the dream, but the only difference is that
in the dream I was naked because it was more comfortable, and in real life, I
was not wearing a shirt because my morning routine was disrupted just enough
that I forgot to put a shirt on. So as I was there sitting in my car,
evaluating my options, I decided to put on my hoodie, and go up to work wearing
that, as I know hoodies are appropiate wear, and I remember a moment when I
first started working where David was wearing a hoodie, and in training, he
said that he was only wearing a shirt underneath, but he was wearing the hoodie
to hide the fact that he was wearing a shirt. So this was the best solution, so
I put the hoodie on, and I am currently sitting at my desk wearing just my
undershirt and hoodie. The whole thing is quite comical to me. To add to the
comedy of it, we had catered lunch last night (which by the way has me wholly
against bread, and is probably the last time I will eat bread) and from this
lunch we have a bunch of left over lemons, and the note had an allusion to the
"when life gives you lemons" mantra, but I just thought the whole thing was
amusing and fit this scenario quite well as well, so I took one of the lemon
slices, and squeezed it into my water (that's something that I have taken a
liking to lately when I drink water at home) and that's the state of things
now.

I do want to do some discovery writing later, so I will cut this article short
so that I have time later to do some discovery writing.

Holy shit, I totally forgot another, far more interesting dream that I had last
night. It just came to me in a moment, as I was reading some more of Brothers
11.09, and in a flash I all of a sudden remembered this entire section of the
dream. I don't remember what the story was, why I was in there, but I remember,
I got into an elevator. Now, this elevator was not at all like the sort of
elevator that you would imagine when I say the word elevator, this elevator was
quite large, like a freight elevator. It had walls all around, but it did not
feel constrained at all. It had two entrances, the entrance I came in, and the
"front entrance". There was something remarkable about this elevator. Indeed, I
do not know the full nature of the building that this elevator was a part of,
but I do know that it was some sort of judgment location. In this elevator,
which was in a circular shape all around, for the most part (at the very least,
it was not square, it could have been a sort of octogon, and there were
certainly parts of the wall which were straight) there were many people, all of
whom were in it for their own reasons, and all of them sitting there, waiting
to come to their stop to meet the judge. Some of the people there were almost
familiar with the scene, and others there were not, and were more baffled that
they were there, as if this were some sort of mistake, and that they didn't
deserve to be there. I could describe in so much detail some of these people,
and I think I will, because it seems important to me. I will say, that I
remember getting on this elevator at the top floor, and I was waiting for my
stop, which was near the bottom, not floor 1, but I think floor 2 or 3. In
fact, I did not care if it were two or three where I got off, just I knew that
it was not floor one. And on this elevator, I remember, one of the first stops,
a woman, with children, how many I don't know, but she had at least one in a
stroller, one on her hip, and another one or two that were with her and
associated with her, and all of this she had in the way that I imagine mothers
like to have. She was not burdened by her children at all, rather, she was the
sort of mother that you can find despicable, the sort that would seek to morph
and bend her children's will to her life. She had things in her life that she
wanted to do, and the well being of the children, well, she just kept them with
her because that was just the state of things, similar to how women keep a
purse with their things in it. She was treating these children as she would
treat the contents of her purse, valuble contents, but not more than that, not
treating them as young people, but treating them as items that needed to be
carried with her from place to place. And what I remember most about this
woman is that she very strongly felt that she didn't belong there, and that her
stop was one of the first stops, and she was hurrying her children along when
she exited on the 72nd floor, and she was much annoyed, almost as if she were
there to sort things out with the judge there. This woman did not strike me as
very significant, although now at this time of writing about her I find her
very significant, and I am very glad to have met her, I do not know her name,
but it would be something like the self-righteous mother. Yes, I have seen the
self righteous mother. There was another woman I know that was there, and this
woman was very much a sort of opposite of this mother. She was the sort of
woman, maybe not homeless, but she had that homeless wrinkled look about her,
as if she smoked a lot of cigarettes, and maybe had dome some harder drugs, but
drugs were not her issue, but her issue was more that she had just lived a very
hard and homeless life, but not maybe homeless, but just the sort that had
lived a hard life, and she would be the sort that if you address her in any
way to talk about anything, she would be the kind to always reply with a sort
of nihilistic way, like "what should I care, that your musings or questions or
problems or conversations have nothing to do with how I'm going to live in a
way that eases my suffering, so I will go back to my ciggarrette and continuing
living on in the way that has worked for me for all these years" something like
that. Although I did not speak with her, I only saw her there, and she struck
me also in the dream. So that was her. Around the edges, there were some other
people, and these other people I don't remember much. Most were very timid.
There was one woman who I remember who was quite fat, not obese my any means,
but certainly fat, and I remember her sort of being the kind that would go on
in the way that I think only fat people of that kind do, about the whole thing
here, in her good-natured fat person sort of way. She was the sort of fat where
you look at her, and you can imagine that her fatness was caused by her eating
a beach ball whole and inflating it in her stomach, so that her body from her
upper thighs where the fat of the thiighs meets the hips, to the fat below her
breasts, under her breasts, was a prefect sphere, not uncannily so, but just
that sort of body type, and her breasts, which were also very fatty and
neccisarily large, would rest on her stomach, and would the fat would go up
into a double chin sort of thing, but it wasn't really a double chin, it was
just a very large single chin, and in general she had this demeanor of that
sort of fatness. Indeed, the way I describe it makes her sound more fat then
she is, she was not obese, I want to emphasize that again, because obese is a
whole new level, but this woman was just fat. And she was the sort of fat
person that is so naive and good-natured that you can't hate them for being
fat, but you just have to sit there and smile, and laugh with her in her
good-natured way, because how can you not. ANd that was another person, and I
actually remember having a short conversation with her, since she was also the
person who would make conversation with anyone, and speak with them, and she
would always be your friend in her good-natured way, and she told me a bit
about what this place was, and what it was all about, that it was a sort of
place where people go down to their particular levels, and each different level
has a different sort of judge and that's what these people are here for. So
those are the people there that I remember around the edges, and I also
remember some asian brothers, teenagers, but I didn't talk with them or make
note of them, I just remember they were very scared and kept to themselves in
the corner. Then, in the center, and this was the main subject of what happened
in the dream, and I don't remember the timeline of when this happened in
relation to me talking with the fat girl (and the fat girl had a fat friend as
well, and they both were there and they were both good-natured, and they both
knew why they were there but they didn't dwell on it, and instead had
good-natured conversations about whatever such people have conversations about,
probably some sort of good-natured gossip amongst their circle of fat friends)
but regardless, in the center of this elevator, there was a fight that was
beginning to break out between two people there. Both of these people were
small women, and I use the word woman lightly. They were both very much women,
but they were both very visibly beaten by the world, in a different way than
the cigarette smoking woman, these both women were wretched souls. And what
they were fighting over was this. One of the women had a bottle of pills,
oxytocin if I had to guess what the pills were, and the other woman was
pestering her just to have a couple of the pills, and the first woman wasn't
willing to give any of them to her. There was no resentment or anything like
that, you could easily tell by both of their appearences (and I wish I could
describe them to do them justice, as their apperence was very vivid to me, but
the words to describe them are not coming to me) that they were both "druggies"
as someone of uncouth taste in describing people would call them. Let me try
and describe. The woman with the pills, she was probably in her forties, they
were prbobably both in their forties, but they were the sort of forties where
you look at them and you could guess that they could be anywhere from twenties
to forties, because the wear and tear that they have put on their bodies
through perpetual use of narcotics was very visible on their age. Now, the one
with the pills, she was a little better off than the one without, her skin was
a little better, and she had a little more meat on her bones, although they
were both very emaciated kind of skinny. The kind of skinny not of an anarexic
person, but instead the kind of skinny of someone who only eats because the
food makes it so they can subsist to their next dosage of whatever substance
they are addicted to. But the one with the prescription, and I do not know how
she came upon this prescription, it could have been prescribed to her but she
the methods that she went to get it prescribed to her were probably
illigitement if I had to guess, she was a little more meaty, as I said, and I
think had some mix of Black and Hispanic blood from her skin if I had to guess,
but she probably could have been missing some teeth, and her eyes, if you
looked into them, they would not be the eyes of someone who was entirely in
control of their life, but instead they were the eyes of someone who thought
that they had control of their life, but in reality, deep down, when you go
past that surface level, you can see that they knew that they didn't have
control. But it wasn't her that struck me so much, it was the other. The other,
she was I think entirely black, probably had some missing teeth although I did
not observe that, she was dreadfully skinny, not through starvation, but
instead like I said, only eating what she needed to to subsist from one dosage
to the next, and in her eyes was desperation. Desperation and suffering.
Indeed, I would say that this one had more of her faculties in her control than
the first. She was suffering. And so this is how the fight started to break
out. The desperate skinnier one, she at first asking calmly if she could have
just a couple of the pills that the first had, but in her very desperate but
calm way, and after being refused, she began to want to start the quarll there.
And I remember, this was a moment in the whole dream that I remember, they were
beginning to quarall, and the desperate one, I could tell that she felt no
disdain or hatred of the first, that she was simply desperate to have the
pills, and she only felt disdain towards the other in the sense that she really
wanted some pills, and the first was looking down on her almost in disgust at
her want for the pills, even though she herself was just as dependent on them
as the other was, and it was this sort of looking down on someone because of
their desperation for something that you have, that struck me, and it was in
this way that they continued to quarell. And I remember standing there, along
the edge of the wall, and my first thought was, "I should not interfere in the
affairs of others" but I saw that clearly their affairs were not being handled
in the best way, that they were clawing at eachother and beginning to fight
as cats might, and cats fighting, not playing but cats fighting, that is a
truly awful thing, and I saw that, I decided that they were not in control of
their affairs either, that it was the power of the narcotics and their
addiction to it that was in charge of their affairs, and so I decided that I
had the power to step in, and so I did, I got in between them, and I turned my
attention to the attacker. But I turned to her and used minimal neccesary force
to prevent her from continuing to assult the woman with the pills, and I tell
you that minimum neccesary force was not even physical force. Almost by my act
of getting in there and turning to her, she had defeated herself, and she
collapsed before I had even really made any move to subdue her. And the
one being attacked, the one the with pills just sort of turned to her with a
look of disgust, but I was there, and I sat her up and got a sort of control of
her from her back, and I tried my best to comfort her. She began wailing in
pain and agony, the sort of pain that could have been interpreted as the sort
of pain that some people feign to get what they want, but I knew that this was
not that, that this screaming was true pain, true suffering. She had been using
these narcotics to help her try and forget some dark element, so evil or
injustice of her past, some heart break or something of herself that she was
using narcotics to drown away, so now not only was the pain of withdrawal
coming to her, but the pain of that past which she used, it was coming up. She
was a wretched suffering soul. So I tried to comfort her. I just looked at her,
I didn't say words out of fear of saying something dreadfully stupid, which I
know I would say something stupid if I said anything, and I remember just being
there, controlling her body from the back, and feeling the utmost empathy for
her soul as my own soul, my own mind, tried to find the words in this
situation. And I remember saying somethnig like, after she had been wailing
like this for a long time and I was in this state of empathy and working my
brain analytically for the right words to say, I said something like "The
narcotics aren't there, listen to your body and feel your suffering, let it be
with you, I know your withdrawal hurts, but you just let it hurt" or something
like that, and I tell you those words now because something like those words is
what I had determined to say, but I don't think I really said those, and really
all I was saying was, "it's okay, it's okay, I'm here, I know it hurts, but
it's okay" and she got some comfort from that but she also wailed out, and I
remeber this "You don't know how this feels!" and I could determine that she
was in great pain, but I knew that she could withstand it, I saw that kindled
flame that never goes out was still alive in her, but it was so overdrawn by so
much pain and suffering. And I said "I know I don't, but it's okay, it's okay,
I'm here, I know it hurts, I know you are suffering" or something like that.
And at some point, I don't remember exactly what happened, if I appealed to the
other woman, or if the other woman did it on her own accord, (the woman I was
holding was now at this point in a state of suffering, and was no longer
pleading for the pills) and I think I did appeal to the woman now that I think
about it, I said, "Look at how this person is suffering, it could be you
suffering this way" and the woman, with a sort of disdain like "fine, if I give
you a couple pills then you will leave me alone." She took out two of the pills
and gave them to this woman, and she took them, and I tell you I could feel
that she almost felt guilty taking them there in front of me, but she took
them, and almost seeking my approval, I allowed her to take them. To be honest,
I did not know if that was the right thing or not, to let her have the pills,
but I certainly knew that telling her to abstain from them was not the right
thing to do, especuially when she had them in her hand, and I knew for sure
that it had to be her will, her choice to make that decision.

That was the main event of that dream, like I said, I don't remember the
timeline of it all, the mother was near the beginnig, but I forget when the
conversation with the fat chick happened with this whole event, and I also
remember actually getting down to the second or third floor and making my way
off, although that was the end of the dream if that happened. But this whole
event with these two "druggies" was the most profound aspect of the dream, and
the part that stuck with me the most and what I wanted to get out.


