# 20180730
So last night I had two dreams, both of which were very interesting. Again,
these dreams some what paralleled eachother in a way, although each of these
was not as profound as the last pair that I had. Still, there has to be
something that could be said about the nature of these two dreams, I'm just not
sure what it is. I could speculate, but before I do that it only makes sense to
get into them.

So the first dream occurred in an interesting location. It was a sort of dream
version of Plano Road and Arapaho road, outside my parents house. I was going
what is IRL south (which I always mix up with west, and in the dream world,
that direction actually is east), on Plano road, and I was approaching the
intersection of Arapaho, and I am pretty sure in the dream world, these things
are named the same. So I was driving, and Kyle was in the car with me, and as I
was approaching this intersection, it started raining very hard. Like, near
flash flood level of rain. Very heavy rain. I could see out of the windsheild
just fine, but it got the roads very wet very quickly, and made things more
slick.

So as I approached the intersection, I was going to take a left onto arapaho,
but instead of getting on the road itself, I was going to turn "beyond" the
road, to the two way alleyway that is on the other side of the wall that
seperates the alley from the actual road. This alleyway and wall don't exist on
irl Arapaho, but they do in the dream version. Well, as I went to turn into
this alleyway, I was turning, and as I turned, I started to go into a slight
slide. It was not as though I was losing control, it was the sort of slide that
you will go into any time you take a turn on any road, and it's wet, and you
take the turn a little fast. As I started to slide, because I did not think I
was going fast enough to slide, but it's a dream so apparently I was, I let off
the accellator and began to counter steer. I corrected the car, but as I
counter steered in the other direction, the rear of my car grazed against
another car that was sitting there facing the other way (this car was facing
dream north, and I was turning into dream south). As soon as it grazed it, the
first thought I had was "oh, that was barely a tap, hopefully that didn't cause
any actual damage, and then I looked back and saw that it caused a pretty good
sized crater and disfiguration in the body of her car, not enough to cause any
structural damage, but certainly enough to make it noticable. After I looked
back and saw this, I swore a little bit, and I remember thinking something
like, "God damn it, cars are so sensitive, the slightest bump and then
insurance has to get involved." I find it funny how I was almost humanizing the
cars at this point, although I did not dwell on it. Well, the woman driving the
car turns around and comes up behind me, and I stop, and we start working
through paper work there. As the woman gets out of her car, and Kyle and I are
getting out as well, the only thing I could think about was how much I did not
want to fuck with insurance or liability, or anything, and how much I wished
that this person were cool. I was ever hoping a little that the person would
just let me drive off, but I knew that that was overly wishful thinking, and I
was certainly not expecting that. Well, as soon as this woman gets out of the
car, Kyle recognizes her and they immediately get big smiles and hug and start
to start conversation as good friends who haven't seen eachother in a bit do.
Also, a little description of this woman, she was an older lady, probably in
her fifties. She was black, and she seemed like the sort of sensible black lady
that you would meet and say something like, "She all right". She was the sort
that you know has a kind heart but at the same time "Ain't gonna put up with
that shit" if you start to try and take advantage of her. The relationship
between her and Kyle, if I had to guess at it, would be something as leader to
attendee in something like a bible study or something of that sort.

Well, she got out of her car, and we started exchanging information. I was
quite relieved that she was cool, and that Kyle knew her, and while part of me
couldn't help being dissapointed that she was getting my info, I was still
quite relieved that she was cool, and at the same time, I did hit her car and
there was damage. As "stupid" as I thought it was, this was totally within the
realm of mutual respect of human interaction, so I was relieved.

I do remember stuttering and not knowing what papers to grab and things like
that though. She would ask for some form or something, and I would not really
know what to get, and I would just grab all of the things in my car and pick
out the one that I thought she wanted and say "I think that's it" or something,
and she would take it, and she would seem satisfied so I would determine that I
picked the right form. And as she started collecting these things, I remember
something quite funny happened. I remember her saying, "you know what, I can
just file all of these things right away, and we won't have to deal with the
wait and hassle of going through the whole system, I can speed things along."
and right there, where we had parked our cars and exchanged information, there
was a sort of area that had a desk almost as if it were her office. What I was
able to gather was that she did insurance work for a living, so she was just
going to file all the claims and push all the paperwork through her insurance
right then and there, so she put on her "working glasses" and sat at that desk
and began entering forms and filing things, and doing her work things right
there at the desk on the street. At that point, I remember someone, and I think
it was my mom and dad who walked up, although it could have just been Kyle who
was there, saying something like, "You don't know how good of a deal this is"
and I remember saying something like, "Well yeah, it will be nice to have this
whole thing squared away right here on the street, I look forward to not having
to deal with this." It was at that point that I woke up.

The main feature of this dream was losing control, but never to the point of
totally losing control. I lost slight control of my car, and that caused the
skid, and I lost slight control of insurance situation, when I wasn't sure what
papers to get. Let's get into the second dream before I analyze this one
further.

So this dream also took place on the roads. I remember being on the
intersection of 75 and 635, and even these locations I still think of south of
75 as dream West, so whatever. Anyway, in the dream version of this
interchange, there is a long almost roller coaster bit that snakes up and down
going dream west that is the HOV entrance to dream 635 north. This HOV entrance
is on the left side, so it has to go up and over 75 in order to let out into
LBJ. As it goes over, in the dream version, it lets out into regurlar 635, and
at the peak of the ramp, it takes a sharp downward fall, very similar to a
roller coaster, and then leads into LBJ.

At this point, I always want to say a bit about my dream experince of highways.
In many dreams, the nature of the highway is different then IRL, in that there
will be cars that get on and off, but at times I will run on and off, or use
tools such as rollerblades, hoverboards, and things like that to get on and off
and navigate the highways. This is not considered strange to the dream people,
and in fact, I would say that it is a typical use case of the highway system in
the dreams. I will say though, that this use case is usually associated with
some sort of emotion. Usually it is associated with a sort of nervousness, as
you have to take care that other cars do not run into to, and it is also
associated with a sort of adrenaline sometimes.

In this dream, I begin going on this ramp, and when I realize just how steep it
is, and I go down it, as I'm going along it, I am having quite a lot of fun. I
am in a car when I do this, but I think about how fun it would be to utilize it
in other ways. At that point, I remember seeing Kyle, and he was skateboarding,
and I called (I was breifly inturrupted here by work things, just felt like
noting that for what it might be worth) him over, and I told him to check this
out. And I was going up and down the snakey part, and he and I both made it up
to the peak. When we got up there, I remember saying something like, "This is
a pretty sick spot huh," and Kyle said, "Yeah, it's awesome" and he got on his
skateboard and started going down. I remember being a little nervous for him,
because I had not gone down on a skateboard, and I saw him wavering a bit.
Well, as he got closer to the bottom, he started to weave a little bit to
prepare for the cars he was about to enter on to, and as he was weaving, he
lost control and took a sharp ninety degree turn into the wall. He went full
momentum into the wall.

I immediately slid down on my butt down to him, and I got to him as quickly as
I could. I assessed the situation, and determined that he had a concussion. He
was conscious, but very confused. He was lying on the ground, asking what was
happeneing, and I just remember repeating, it's okay, you had a concussion, you
need to stay down and rest. He kept insisting that he wanted to get up, but I
told him that he should stay and rest, and I held him in my arms, and I gently
kept him lying down, resisting his efforts to stand. Eventually, after a while,
professionals showed up, and I knew that he was in the hands of people that
knew what they were doing, and they took him away in an ambulance.

I knew the whole time that he would be okay. It was interesting, because even
at the point that he swerved into the wall, I never had a thought that he
wouldn't recover from it. I knew it was a concussion, and that he just needed
to rest.

I'm reminded by my dream with the drug addict. I comforted her in the same way
I comforted Kyle. This dream was different though. This dream I woke up, and
had the inclination to see if Kyle was okay. It would be silly to think that
something might happen to him.

The only thing I can think is that he has a surgery coming up on his shoulder,
my mom told me about that, so the only thing I can think is that this dream is
somehow a manifestation of my concern for him during that surgery. Something
like that. But I think there has to be more than that. It has the same aspects
that falling dreams do as well. The sort of falling in control, but losing
control. The difference is that in this dream it was somebody else falling.

I do want to say as well that, although I felt that I was in some way
responsible for what happened to him, I felt no guilt. That is, I did not feel
in any way that I was guilty to him. I reasoned that I had brought him over and
showed the ramp, but he very much decided himself to skateboard down it. That
was something I wrestled with after I woke up, like, "am I somehow guilty for
what happened just because I showed it to him?" but I did not feel guilt in the
dream or after I woke except in this questioning intellectual way.

So both of these dreams have aspects of losing control of things. The first
dream it was me who lost the control and others who maintained it, where in the
second dream it was someone else who lost control, and me who maintained it.
There must be something to be said about this dichotamy of dreams. It must
indicate something about what my brain has control over in my life. Although
maybe control isn't the right word, that word means manipulate to a lot of
people. Mastery is maybe the right word, or you skill set. What I am
comfortable with.

And to be honest, I would be more comfartable handling a concussion than I
would be handling insurance paperwork. I want there to be more to the dream
than that, but sometimes there is not, so so be it I suppose.

I have to get to the meeting now.

So I have some time before I get to BJJ open mat to talk about my visit with my
father yesterday. He has been moved to a rehab facility from the bone marrow
facility some time last week, and he is recovering quite well. He is talking
much more to his normal self, and while he is not at one hundred percent
capacity, his speech is not slurred and we were able to have regular
conversation like we usually have.

There honestly wasn't much to say about my dad. He has been recovering quite
well, he has begun physical therapy, and his speech therapy and other "mental
capacity" type therapy has been going well as well.

More, I would like to talk about my mom. My fucking mom. Jesus Christ. Like
holy fuck. Swearing is not a good way to express what I am feeling, but like,
Holy shit, I don't know what else to say.

So there were a few things. So as we were talking there, she mentioned "what's
up with you," and I mentioned all of the usual things, Work, BJJ, the usual.
She mentioned yoga but I said I haven't been doing that as much lately. So
whatever. She then asked about food, like fish, chicken, beef, that sort of
thing. And when we talked to the topic of food, I mentioned that I got a
blender and was playing around with Kale shakes. And I said I'll do some orange
juice, some Kale, then Garlic, Ginger root, and Tumeric root. And when I
mentioned Tumeric Root, she started off, "well, I just have to say it because
I'm a mom, and I have to say these things, but maybe you don't remember, but
Dr. Li, when we were asking about what you should do after you got off of
warfarin, we asked him about Tumeric, and he said that you shouldn't do that,
because it doesn't have measurable factors, and he said to stick to the baby
asprin, because if something were to happen to you again, they would know how
to look for the effects of asprin, but with tumeric he said that it uses
different clotting factors, or somethning like that, and it won't be as easy to
figure out what is going on" and she said something to that effect, and she
probably added a few more decorative clauses like, "and you know I just have to
mention it because I'm your mom and I have to worry about these things."

Well, I said that I did not remember that, and I said something like, "Well
that's the last time I ever share anything with you," and she got defensive
like, "Oh, I've gotten a lot better though haven't I," and I said, "you have
but you make it too easy to give you shit." and we diverged from that point.

Anyway, that was that whole experience. As I was getting ready to leave, and it
was getting dark, they both mentioned that they were concerned for me getting
back to my car, and the mentioned there if there was a way to get a police
escort, and I said not to worry about it, I will be along the road, it's lit, I
will be jogging, I'm not an easy target, etc etc. but they insisted I get an
escort, and they mentioned to the nurse if she could call an escort. Well, as
we got out of the room, I made it to the front desk, and I called the elevator,
but before I got in the nurse stopped me and said, "Wait, I'm calling the
police now, we'll get you an escort." Well, after some back and forth going on,
she actually handed the fucking thing (it was'nt really a phone, I don't know
what it was) to me, and had me talk to the police, and I gave them my name and
number, and I didn't know the names of the places I was parked, but I knew
exactly where I was parked, and I told her that this whole thing was a waste of
time, and that I felt entirely comfortable walking to my car, and that it was
my parents who wanted me to get an escort, and if there was a way to just
cancel the whole thing. Eventually she got my number, and asked me to wait
outside the valet area. So I went to the valet area, and I swear I felt nervous
just standing there. I was within reach of the hospital entrance, so I wasn't
in any real danger, but I remember thinking, "I wish I were moving to my car
right now, standing here doing nothing I feel vulnerable," so I started walking
up and down on the decorative little ball things they had there, and I looked
at my phone and saw 8:56, and I decided that if the escort didn't come by 9 I
was leaving. And 8:59 rolled around, and I had had enough waiting and I jogged
to my car. I was almost within sight of my car when I got a call from the
police asking where I was, and I said I had made it to my car, and I'm sorry
for wasting your time, and thank you for doing this, but it was my parents idea
and I really just wanted to walk. So she said okay, as long as you got to your
car safely, that is all that matters. And so I drove off.

In the entire thing, I remember thinking about the whole thing. Firstly, it
felt emasculating just waiting there for an escort. Putting aside the fact that
the word escort I usually associate with "prostitute", the concept that I need
to get into a police vehicle in order to be safe is absurd. Secondly, and
something I thought about even before I was standing outside, the last time I
was in a police vehicle was when they were putting me in handcuffs and sending
me to jail, and I did not feel like ever getting into another police vehicle
ever again. Indeed, I hope to never in my life get into a police vehicle. I
find the whole thing repulsive. I feel like there is a lastly, but really it's
just the first two things.

I got into my car and I just started saying, "Fuck her". "Fuck her, and fuck
him to, but mostly fuck her." I'm not sure if the actions I made are in any way
taking steps towards seperating myself from my parents, but as I was driving
home, I thought about the whole thing, and I think it is steps towards that. I
am doing better at making decisions for myself, and seeing this entire shift in
thinking of how the relationship with my parents is transitioning from parent
to child to adult to elderly, I think these sorts of things are neccesary. It's
as if my mom in particular doesn't understand that I need to be an adult.

She mentioned that "I will always be her baby." and such justification for her
actions appalls me. It's clinging to the past, and such clinging is never good.

One last point before I leave, I think my treatment of her should be to tell
her to be unapolegetic. Instead of prefaceing her talon like grip on her words
with things about "I'm your mom and I have to", instead I should tell her to
just tell me these things more as an equal. I'm not sure if that will help, but
it's the takeaway I have discovered just now.
