# 20180817
So last night I had two dreams. One was very symbolic, and the other was much
more based on reality, sort of.

Let's start with the second dream. I forget which dream occured first, but I do
think this is the order.

So the second dream I remember, has to do with me leaving a supermarket with
Daniel, and Jessi, and Shravic. This supermarket, it was like Aldi, near my
home, but much larger. Mostly, the orientation of the parking lot to the road
was like Aldi, although it was in some dream area. The part of my dream area of
the Metroplex which is related to the part south of 635 IRL. Somewhere in that
area. It is a sort of blur to me what those streets are like IRL, and the same
is true of those streets in my dreams. Well, I was leaving this supermarket
with them, and we were going to our individual cars, and I remember wanting to
go to BJJ open mat. I then thought about my hand, and how I didn't go in the
morning, and why would I go in the afternoon. And I thought, "Well, my hand has
recovered enough from the morning to now for me to go." So I made my way to the
open mat.

When I got there, the parking lot was similar to the parking lot of my last
dream, and the dream where Evan revealed to me that he took acid, but it was a
different lot (it might be on the same street though). Regardless, I go into
the lot, and the building is like a roller derby, and there are people skating
around, but there is Jiu Jissu that is happening as well. Still, I don't stay
for long, although I do partake in it a little bit.

After that, I leave early, and I make my way to my parking garage, the parking
garage of work. Now, I feel it is somewhat relevant that I remember nothing of
these trips, I just remember being at these locations. I don't even remember
getting in or out of the car, I was simply at these location when I decided to
drive there. So I go to my parking garage, and I go all the way to the top
floor, and I park there. I then go down one level to the fourth floor, and in
the opposite corner of where I usually park IRL, there is Tim Hoffman. Tim is
there, and he is in his car, and we start talking about things. As I look out
the area that you can see the outside from the garage, I notice that the
building which should be the work building is actually an apartment building.
Anyway, Tim and I start talking, and the conversation was very related to some
of the lectures I have been watching with Jordan Peterson. We started talking
about "the uprising," and he and I both agreed that there was nothing to uprise
against, but that people would continue to propogate it, and create one
themselves. It was at this point that I mentioned Peterson's lectures, and I
started to talk about how we are arranged into left and right, and how those
coorespond to chaos and ... but here I trail off, unconfident in my words.
Regardless, we still agree that certainly this uprising is the result of things
being too good, and people wanting to revolt in order to create chaos in the
world, because there is too much order. And the question then became, "how do
we stop it" and there was something of an implied, "assuming it can be stopped"
and I said, "I think the only way is for people to realize that what they are
doing is being prompted by themselves, so the only way to combat this false
revolution is through discussion. Peterson is doing that, and we are doing
that, it's just difficult to break through to those that don't want to hear
it". We more or less agreed on that point, but I don't think Tim was fully
convinced.

At some point in the discussion, and it was in the middle of the discussion,
and I forget how these events interweave with our conversation, but a woman
from the apartment complex, rather large, although not too fat, came down with
a hamper full of clean clothes that needed to be folded. She came, and placed
herself between me and Tim, but off to the side so that we could still have our
conversation, and said, "Don't mind me, I am only trying to find the clothes in
here that fit." And so, at this point, we stopped our conversation, and Tim
took from the hamper a rather large bra, and he held out the bra so that the
two cups were displayed before him, and he placed the cups over the woman's
breast, over her shirt, and they matched rather perfectly (which makes sense,
it was her laundry, so of course her own bras would fit her, the whole thing is
really silly) and she thanked Tim, and proceeded to take the bra and put it on
underneath her shirt. At this point, I shuffled through the laudry, and amongst
the clothing, I found two more bras each identical to the one she just put on,
and I presented them to her and said, "these look like they would fit you
also," and she grabbed them and said thank you to me. She then proceeded to
fold the rest of her clothes, and Tim and I went back to the conversation.

I have no idea what this woman represents. I might have to do some associations
at some point, because to be quite honest I have no idea how she fits into this
dream.

Regardless, after Tim and I finished our conversation, we got into his truck,
which was quite more modern than his truck IRL, (I think it might represent my
conception of how well he takes care of his truck. He drives a ford pickup that
was made in the 70s I think, and it has so many miles on it, and he takes good
care of it, and maintains it well, and as far as I'm aware it is still what he
drives) And we drive off, and the dream ends about a block away from the
parking garage. The garage in the dream goes not to 114, but instead to the
same block of city that I have in my head of the "unknown city of that part of
dallas," I want to say, also, that there was something that happened with me
and him in his truck, but I don't remember. Other people might have been in the
truck at that point, but I don't remember anything about them. That probably
indicates that they are interesting. The words I have to describe these people
are gangster and hooligan, but that doesn't seem to fit, since it seemed as
though Tim was friendly with them. Perhaps they were people that Tim was doing
service to, or something like that. I'm not sure.

So the second dream had a lot to do with the Lion King. But it wasn't the story
of the Lion King, but it was similar to the story. There was the king, I forget
the kings name in the story, but the one with the mane, that gets killed by
Scar. It will be difficult for me to recall what happens. But the way it
happened was, first there was a story, and I was taking part in the listening
to the story of the Lion King, and the second one was the actual story. It was
like, if you are taking part in a play, and you go through the rehersal, but
then later, during the actual play, it's similar to the rehersal, but it's more
serious, and you start to get the notion that what you reherased was not
exactly like what it's like when you actually do the play. Something like that.

Well anyway, during this "rehersal", I remember, I was the main character, the
son of the king (although I am not a prince, and this is not the king, rather,
these are just the images I have in my head, and they happen to coorespond to
those characters in the disney movie) and I remember there was a sort of
crystal. This crystal, it is very difficult to say what it represents, but I
know in the dream, it marked the beginning of the adventure. The call to
adventure so to speak. But it was more than that, because this adventure, it's
the sort of adventure where you say, "I'm ready for it" but you know that know
matter how ready you are, you are in for something that you don't expect, no
matter how much you rehearse. Well, I remember in the rehersal, it was the king
who was hasty to "activate" the crystal, and I was there, being a little
apprehensive, but thinking, "he is the leader, and I will follow him in
whatever he does, that is my role" There was a third Lion there, but this lion
was very quiet throughout the whole dream, in both parts. This lion was a sort
of trusty bodyguard, the sort of guard that guards the leader no matter what.
The role of this lion would be one of sacrifice, for sure, silent sacrifice for
the king so that the king may go on while the sacrifice wards off whatever
hardship it is that would have stopped the king.

So that's all I really remember about this crystal. I think, once we activate
the crystal, a door to a sort of expansive cave opens up, and we start to make
our way in to it.

It is then at this point that the rehersal stops. The scene is similar to the
one of the reharsal. We are in a wide open area, and there is a crystal which
is the focal point of the scene. However, in the real events, the surrounding
area is much darker, and the crystal emmenates way more light. In fact, the
light of the crystal is the primary source of light in that area. It was like,
we were in the desert, at night, and while there might be light from other
sources, the crystal is what gives us light. Anyway, I remember at this point,
we are at the crystal, and this time it was the leader who was apprehensive
about activating the crystal. Apprehensive is not quite the right word. The
leader was opposed to activating the crystal. I then start to convince him to
do so. And at this point, it was interesting, because I began to speak to
myself, and say, "wow, it's very interesting, in the story, I thought it would
go that the leader would convince me, but actually it is I that convinces the
leader." I also thought, "Am I really a follower of the leader, or am I Scar"
and I looked to myself, and saw that I was indeed a follower of the leader, and
I saw far in the distance that Scar was a different character, but I thought
that surely there must be some of Scar in me. But I continued to convince the
leader that this was the path that needed to be taken. So, with a bit of
somberness, the leader activates the crystal, and the cave opens.

I do remember, at this point, there was something of a foreboding, something
that was stopping us from entering the cave. There might have been some gaurd
lions or something. Still, whatever it was, I know we overcame it. I think we
may have fought the guard Lions and one, rather easily. Or maybe it was the
hyenas. That would fit with the lion king story. Whatever it was, we fought
them and won, and made our way into the cave.

So the last thing I remember about this dream, is that we went through some of
the caves, and I remind you that these caves were expansive, and as we make it
to the end of one of the hallways, there is a sort of open area, although not
too open, just a little bit open. There are three more branches that come out
of this open area. So there is the entrance we came from, then a somewhat wide
entrance to the left, an entrance to the left but more straight ahead, then a
sort of raised stage like area, and then an area to the right that was closed
off. And on this staged area was Scar, and two of his hyena's. The biggest
thing I remember about this scene is, "I think this has to be the scene where
Scar kills the leader." At this point, Scar and the Leader were staring at
eachother, and I was there, watching the scene, ready to intervene, but also I
was aware that the whole thing was between these two, and that it was not my
place.

At this point, I don't know what happens next, because I woke up around this
area.

This dream, I like both of these dreams a lot. I want to make some associations
with the woman in my first dream, because she I know has a lot to do with
something, and I am curious what it is.

Also, I have not quite finished Freud's introduction to psychology, I am
through lecture ten, but I feel that I am just getting to the good part and
would like to hold off on interpreting these dreams until I get there.

So I am wholly exhausted from writing right now, and I will stop for the time
being.

So I have taken an interlude at work, and just read Freud's interpretation of
symbolism in dreams. In classic Freudian manner, he likens all symbolism to
have some sexual nature, and even goes so far to say that all of philology
originated from a sexual neccesity. He argues that, first the "mating call" and
then the communication between mates made it a requirement for us to start
communitcating desires between eachother, and from this, we were able to create
strings of rythyms which mean various things, and from these rythyms, we were
able to create devices, devices which eventually ended up divorcing themselves
from their sexual origin, but still have that root fundamentally linked.

Now, of course, when one reads something like this, something so based on
spectulation and not on any historical fact (at least, no fact other than the
mythologies and knowledge of those people that speculate about these things),
one has to meet such an idea with skepticism. But it's a difficult thing here,
the catch 22 of it all, which is, am I meeting this notion with skepticism
because it is uncomfortable and I don't want it to be true, or am I meeting it
with skepticism because it truely is an absurd idea, and of course the origin
or all philology can not be from a sexual origin. I think, it is certainly some
of both, but to this entire notion I say, "there must be at least some merit in
it. Perhaps not _all_ language is derived from a sexual origin, but surely it
is much more significant than people of today would like to believe."

But as a sort of academic exercise, an attempt to try my hand at "this
psychology thing", I will attempt to apply what I have just read to the
popularity of a sport that I have never found very interesting. I want to talk
about the psychology of the sport of American Football.

I came about this sort of psychological analysis by first going through my own
dreams. I have had many dreams of Ultimate lately, which only makes sense,
because it was a large part of my life for many years, and I have a lot of
material, and probably a lot of repressed material, to sift through in my time
with it. In fact, there is a lot buried in the sport that I am most definitely
keeping under wraps, and to have it come out in my dreams is only natural.

But as I was thinking about this dream, I thought about, "what does a disc
represent, from a sexual perspective". As I thought about it, at first it
doesn't seem to represent anything sexually, but if it must represent something
sexual, it must represent a vagina. At the very least, the circle would surely
represent a vagina, and when I imagine a disc, and you imagine it as a circle,
you imagine it as a ring that something could fit through.

Now, of course, the analogy is not perfect, but it suffices in coming up with a
symbol for the disc in the theory that "all concepts come from sexual origin".
If this theory is true, then the disc would have to represent the female
genatalia in some way.

But in my attempts to come up with a sexual origin for the disc, I thought
about other sports, and what their apparatus might represent. Most sports are
played with a ball, and while I have no idea how a ball might be represented
sexually (probably as the breasts, now that I think about it, since the "first
balls" would be fruits, and the fruits represent the breast, or maybe the
ovaries), I thought that maybe the ball represents something more phallic in
nature. Of course, as I ventured upon this conjecture, and determined that it
was probably not the case that a soccer ball, for instance, would be a
representation for the penis, because, well, in order for something to be
phallic, it must come to a sort of point, I was immediately brought to the
notion that "the american football is shaped in a more oblong way."

So it is from this observation that I have begun my theory about why football
is so popular in the United States. It is because of this phallic shape, that
football has become so popular. The main purpose of football is to take the
football to the endzone. If the endzone is a representation of the vagina, then
the notion of "scoring" in football would mean, "to bring the penis into the
vagina" and would be the means by which one would win a woman. It is this
analogy that I think excites people and interests their sexual desires, not
only in a base way, but also in a way that gives them the framework "by which
the best of men maneuver the hazards of a football field to acheive the object
of their desires".

There are many things about the sport of football that I find peculiar. The
first is the arbitrary number of rules. There are rules about downs, about
whether or not you can move before the ball has been put in play, rules about
in what way you can go for the ball, rules about what happens when the ball is
dropped, who can go for it, and in what way they can go for it, and so on and
so on. That has something that has always turned me off about football. It
feels as though there is nothing "fundamental" about it. Something that is
"fundamental" to me, in this usage of the word, is something that draws from
the "raw nature of the universe". So something like MMA to me is a very
fundamental sport, because while there are rules about certain things you are
not allowed to do for the purposes of safety, and there are rules about rounds,
and scoring, and judging, for the purposes of making the sport more spectator
and broadcast friendly, you could derive most of it from the concept of, "put
two people in a cage and see which one will kill the other". It's fundamental
in the sense that there are not a lot of human imposed guidelines and
judgements, the rules of mma, and the stategy of the fights, comes not from
understanding of "the game" but rather from understanding about the physiology
of humans. Two children, when they get in a fight, understand the rules of the
universe when it comes to inflicting damage and controlling their opponent, and
while they may not be very good at it, at the very least, the rules of the
fight are imposed not by some referee or arbitrary observer, but the rules are
enforced by the facts of how the universe is put together.

Football, however, is not so much. Sure, children on a playground might know
the rules football, older children, lets say ages six and up, and as such could
organize themselves in a way to play the sport. But even then, the rules become
a fundamental part of the game, and the enforcement of those rules is something
that the children have to grasp before they can begin to strategize. The notion
of "that is incorrect" is something that is given by the referee rather than
the nature of the universe. In this way, I have never liked the rules of
football.

Going back to our psychological analysis of football, though, these rules have
a different sort of analogy. If the football represents the penis, then the
rules represent the rules that a woman will play when a man tries to "score".
Woman has many rules when it comes to courting males. I fundamentally believe
that football is so popular for spectators, commonly males, but sometimes
"females that wish to fraternize with males" (we all know the type, the kind of
women who will use mascarea as face paint and wear jerseys and jeans and drink
beer and burp, but will always do so in a way that makes her "cute" but this is
another psychlogical phenomenon entirely) but it is popular for males because
it represents the process by which a male will try and "score" with a woman.

The first thing that happens in a game of football, is the offensive team
recieves the football from the sky, and advances it as far as possible. This
represents the source of the male desire. A male will find attraction to a
female "from nowhere", it will just come upon the male. "Love at first sight"
is part of this notion. Usually from a moment of eye contact, eye contact which
is not expected, which comes "from the sky" in a way, immediately excites the
male (and probably the female, although I cannot speak from experience in this
case) and the man will take the object of his desires, which comes from his
penis and the arrousal thereof, and advance as far as he can. This
representation could be in the form of a touchback (which would represent
taking the safe route, advancing and buying a drink say, a tried and true first
move) or in the form of going as far as possible, with a pickup line, with "the
moves" or other such form of advancement. In fact, it is even possible, in
football, to score off of this initial advancement, at which point it is very
exciting to everyone around, and requires a great feat of running across the
entire field, dodging many people who are bent on taking you down, and
exhibiting great speed and athleticism. Such an act would be akin to a man,
from the moment of eye contact, getting straight to the goal, which would be
intercourse, in one go. The man is so captivating, that the woman has no choice
but to succumb to the mans seduction, just merely at the sight of him, and
while she may attempt to take him down, none of her efforts succeed (which
could be her poor defense or the males prowess, or in most cases some of both)
and she is swept away by him and he immediately scores.

But usually, that is not the case, and the man will meet resistance at some
point along the way, and be taken down. This is the woman's way of testing the
man. The woman wants to make sure that the man is "worthy" of the score. The
woman will give the man a few chances to advance the ball to a certain point,
and if the man does not make it there, then she closes herself off. This sort
of ruling, in football, of requireing that the ball advance ten yards every
four downs, is akin to saying "you get four chances to advance position with
me" by the woman.  Punting, is then saying, "I have made my chances at advance,
and I see that they have been thwarted, so instead of continuing to advance, I
will advance myself as far as I can somewhat against your resitance, or "over
it" in a way, and plant a seed that I might come back to later." Something like
that. A man might give a woman his number, and walk away at this point.

But in the case where the man, within the rules of the game, proceeds to
advance the ball, if the ball is advanced far enough in this way, eventually
the man will make it to the score. This is the archetypical story, the man
overcomes hardships, and the man plays "by the rules of the game" and in his
diligence, he is able to score. The object of his desire has been placed in the
endzone, and he is awarded points for such an act. The players of football will
even spike the ball into the zone, which is surely an act of forceful
penetration. When one finally scores, the one who scores will thrust himself
into the woman with great force. This imagary is so fitting that it must have
some merit. Sometimes men will execute some sort of dance, which would
correspond to an act of intercourse (and due to the vulgarity of some gestures,
especially by those that disregard the censors, such an analogy is surely
meritable)

Sometimes, though, the man will advance rather far, but not so far as to be
able to score. The man will then attempt a field goal. The field goal is like
saying, "you were not able advance far enough to receive all of the points, but
you still have the opportunity to score with me". Indeed, the object of kicking
the phallic object through the air, with the hopes that it will land between
the field goal posts (which is another clear represntation of the vagina)
exemplifes the notion that, even if you don't score completely, you will still
be awarded some points for advancing far enough. Such a notion gives hope to
men that, even if the teams is met with all resistance, they will still be able
to score in some way.

The last thing to be analyzed is the notion of the defense. The fear of someone
else weilding masculinity, and using it to score in your endzone could have
multiple interpretations. It is surely emmasculating to see someone else,
especially someone who you may be opposed to, wielding the object of sexuality
and attempting to use it to score a woman that you wish to protect. In fact,
this sort of protection is a similar sort of protection that a brother might
feel for a sister, or that a father might feel for his daughter. I think the
father and daughter analogy is the most fitting here. Rooting for your teams
defense activates the same centers, I would think, that would seek to deter a
man from scoring with your daughter. The offense is seeking to overcome the
defenses of the daughter, and notably, the defenses placed there by her father.

In this way, I think that football satisfies a sexual wish of those that watch
it. When one watches a game of football, and roots for a team, they are seeing
the ways in which a team may advance the football in this way. They are seeing
the ways that the best men are able to overcome the defenses of those that
would wish to stop them, while still adhering to the rules of the game, the
rules set down by the woman, and in watching their team score, they get excited
at the notion that their team has fulfilled the innate wish of the male to
achieve sexual intercourse with a woman. It is not so much about the act of
intercourse (although the dances that teams will do after scoring will show
very definitely that sexuality is certainly present) more so than it is a
representation of the methods with which one can acheive the sexual object of
the woman.

This is all very Freudian in it's interpretation, but it explains a lot to me
about why football is such a popular sport.

Basketball, our next most popular sport, has similar imagary of sending a ball
into a hoop, and soccer again, with the passage of a ball through the goal. But
these images are not quite as vivid as they are in football, which really goes
to show the nature of america.

Baseball, surely has a similar analysis, although I am quite exhausted in
talking about the psychological and sexual notion of sports, and would rather
not continue on at this point.

In fact, the whole thing seems rather absurd to me, and it is quite possible
that I am simply taking a Fruedian idea and wholly distorting it to ridiculous
proportions. But at the same time, there must be some truth in what I have
written, the images and symbolism strike too true to not have at least some
merit.

That is all for now.
