# 20180826
So last night I know I had a couple of dreams, but the only dream I remember is
the last one I had. And this particular dream is pretty expansive, so I'm not
too concerned about not remembering the other dream, I have plenty of material
to talk about here, but still, I would have liked to remember the first dream
because I remember thinking aboout it at some point in the night, and thinking,
"I know I'm going to forget that dream, in fact, I am already forgetting it."
It might have had to do with translating my lit analyzer into a functional
paradigm. In fact, I think that's what it was, which makes sense why I don't
remember it because it was not so much images as it was structures floating in
space, and not being able to put together the structures how I liked.

Anyway, the last dream I had in the night was rather concrete. It took place in
what I would say is a dream version of a UTD lecture hall, but to say it was a
dream version would be a mistake. It was the room where I took the
undergraduate "theory of programming languages" course, something like that. I
remember the professor was Indian, with gray hair. I also remember that Turkey
was in the course. This was IRL. In the dream, though, I don't know what course
it was. It might have been something like Discrete Math or Prob and Stat. One
of those courses that I found very easy, and didn't have to pay much attention
to. And the thing is, with this course, it was hosted by Alliant, and well, I
don't remember what the subject material was, but I remember thinking, "I can
very easily multitask here, and learn something else while I take this course."

So I remember, earlier in the dream, before I went into the lecture hall, I had
talked with Tim Hoffman about some potential courses on History that he liked,
and he mentioned a place that you could go, and watch some lectures. Like,
physically drive to a house in Dallas somewhere, west of Dream 635, and in this
guys house he had set up a lecture room, and in the lecture room, he would
teach history, and he had something of a random schedule, but if you go enough,
you would eventually get all of his lectures.

When Tim mentioned this to me, I then rememeber talking with Peter Rangel about
the whole thing, and he mentioned that he was interested in carpolling to these
lectures to visit them togther, so we had agreed that when we could, we would
go to them together.

But this day, I couldn't physically go to the lectures, because I was obligated
to visit this Alliant class, whatever it was, and take it. I do remember
thinking though, "I could put the lecture up, and do the homework for that
while I sit for this lecture." And I put the lecture up, but it went onto the
big projector there, to the front of class. And I rememebr thinking, "Oh, I
waos thinking I could be more discrete about this, but apparently not, the
whole class will see it now, and they will know." I then thought further, "It's
okay though, the lecturers here don't use the projector, so the only downside
is that they will know." And the thing is, I really wanted to do this, so I
knew I should have just turned off teh lecture, but instead what I did was just
make it so that the screen was unobtrusive as possibel, and I watched it until
the Alliant Systems lectures came in, and then I paused it.

So when I started the lecture, and then paused it, I was sitting in the far
left edge, towards the middle of the class. That's why I think this lecture
hall corresponds to the wholly useless class "The theory of programming
languages", because that undergrad class was wholly useless from what I
remember, and in that class, I sat to the left end of the hall generally, in
the middle. In the dream though, Barryman was behind me. I remember, he was
behind me, and he was talking to me, telling me about how useless this class
was, and those sorts of things, and talking aobut how he wanted to blow it off,
and so on and so no, and I remember, he had one sort of ejaculation that I
mostly agreed with, but wholly did not want to assocciate myself with, and so I
ducked under the table when he said it, and when the professors (one of whom
was Leslie, and the other two were other arbitrary faces that could be Alliant
managers) looked over, I think they knew I was associated, but I was trying to
make it very clear that I was not the cause of such a disturbance. The whole
thing was not very noteworthy, I am making it sound way more dramatic in words
than it actually was in the dream, but still, it was there.

And when I say I agreed with the ejactlation, it was something that I agreed
with, the statement itself, but actually saying the statement out loud, I
remember thinking, "Okay, that's true, but it accomplishes nothing to say it
out loud in this way. In fact, it is wholly immatture to out burst like this in
this way, such a thing should be kept inside, it is correct to keep something
like this in, and to bring it out with tact if you decide to bring it out." And
like I said, I forget exactly what the ejactulation was, but it was something
related to the fact that this lecture was useless and that a different lecture
would be more informative.

And the thing is, part of the reason I disagreed with making the ejactulation
is because, it destroys any nuance of speech when you make the statement like
that. To just declare in a shout that a lecture is useless is not exactly true,
yes, it might be useless, but that doesn't mean it is entirely useless. And it
certainly isn't useless in the way that everyone will interpret the word
useless on it's own, each individual will have their own idea of what useless
means, and without context or nuance, you will simply be seen as "having a
fit". So that was why I was opposed to being associated with that outburst.

After this, the lecture continued. I remember we talked about five problems,
each growing more difficult in succession. The first I remember was rather
easy, but I don't remember the problem, and it might be similar to how my
father, being victim to a stroke, would say "of course I know that" to someone
who would ask him his name, but then when asked his name, he wouldn't be able
to give it. In my dream state, these problems were such that, "Of course I knew
the answer to them" but if I would have been probed further to provide an
answer in the dream, I wouldn't have been able to give it.

Regardless though, I remember sitting there, and thinknig, "I wish I were at
this other lecture," and I continued to watch the other lecture, where people
were gathering and they were sitting on the floor of his house in front of the
desks, in a sort of spontaneous way, and they were talking about the history of
something.

So we went on in this state for a bit, me paying attention to the history
lecture while the Alliant lecture was going on in the background. And after a
time, I remember the Alliant lecture ended, and we went into something of a
"study time". It is hard to describe, but this study time was such that people
were given time to go over the problems and work through them, and if they had
questions, they were free to converse with the other students or the
professors. And around this time, Leslie looked at me, and said, "Oh, good,
it's Brett next to Barryman, could you tell him what's going on." And what was
going on is that he was getting fired. IRL, he quit from Alliant about a week
ago after working there for about a month or two, but in the dream he was
getting fired. I did not tell him though.

At this point, I remember two things. I will say the one that I think happened
first. I remember looking over to the other side of the lecture room, and
sitting there was one guy who was working through problem one, and a couple of
other guys that he was inquiring about the problem. The first guy, the one
asking the questions, I remember thinking that he had some intellegence, and he
wasn't very smart for not being able to answer problem one, but I could tell
that the two people he was asking the question two were wholly not smart, but
the question asker wasn't quite aware of it. Rather, he had his suspicions that
they were not smart, but decided not to act on them (as I do in real life a lot
of times). And this question, I remember, was something that in the dream I
could have answered.

I then remember Chris Konkol coming up to me and telling me about a solution to
problem four, which had to do with the "path of the ark of the covenent" and he
told me that the trick was to take the second derivative of the path, and when
you do that, you know what direction the arcs are. And oh my god, I just
understood the pun. My dream self just created a pun. Holy fuck. It did not
make sense to me at all in the dream, I remember saying something like, "If you
don't know the path of the Ark, how would you be able to take the second
derivative" But he just kept showing me the problem as if it were self
evident. "You take the second derivative, and then you have the Arc's and with
the arcs, you can place it under the restraints that we we know about the
direction of the ark of the covenant, and from that you can derive the path."
And he said all of these things, and I sitll didn't understand, because I
didn't see how you could get the second derivative if we didn't know anything
more than what we were given in the bible, namely the constraints. I would say,
"Yes, I can see how the second derivative would bring you to the path, but I
don't see how we have the second derivative from the verses in the bible" and
he assured me that this was teh solution. I remember seeing two arcs in my
head, with a cone shape representing the restraints, and thinknig that the
problem is wholly incomplete and that I was missing something. Ark and arc must
have been superimposed, so fuck my consciousness for that.

The last thing I remember in the dream is that Leslie came up to the middle row
of the dream, and said, rather untactfully and almost annoucing to everyone,
"Barryman, you are fired!" And she even made a sing song sort of statement
after he became bewildered. "Fi,di-di-die,bi-di-fie, fie, erd!" I remmebr
thinking, "wow, he was sort of useless, but that was wholly unneccary, and
should have been done in private." But that was it. He was still sitting right
behind me when it happened.

I have taken quite a bit of a break now, and I wish to continue to write about
more things.

I must now tell about a story. This is a story of myself, but it could very
easily be the story of a character I have written. It could also be changed
slightly.

So first I will tell the story as it happened, and then I will attempt to
characterize it as a story of some character. I choose to do it in this way so
that I don't get confused. I have found that when I try to tell a characterized
version of something that happened to me, I get confused about my own actual
emotions, and of the emotions of the character, so I will tell my version
first, the version that actually happened to me, and then I will tell the
characterized version.

I have been so inspired by the reading of достоевский lately that I feel I must
create some sort of introduction similar to the way he has. Dos has this way of
telling introduction to stories of things that happened in the characters past
that have a way of filling you in on the exact nature of the character. I am
reminded by Fyodor Karamazov, and the characterization of him as a bafoon, and
then the contrast of that character with Stepan and his characterization as a
patriot. He has a way of telling you "this is the way the character is, and let
me give you a story to encapsulate that." It's a rather engaging literary
technique, and serves as a powerful mode of telling the story, and describing
completely, without ambiguity, the nature of the characters. So with that in
mind, I want to tell this story.

When I was living with my parents for some time, after I had returned from
Seattle, and moved back in to my parents place, and lived there for a good many
weeks, my father, who I honestly do not know entirely what his thoughts were
toward me at that point, told me that there would be a presentation at UTD, a
presentation about Jesus, from a guy who goes around speaking to people and
giving these speeches, and giving the scienctfic case for Christ. He told me
that he wanted me to go, and that I didn't have a choice in the matter. Of
course, I didn't want to go, not because I was particularly opposed to it, but
because, similar to church, it is a waste of time, I have heard all of the
arguments before, and my father, who thought I was lost, was mistaken in that I
was not lost when it came to my understanding of Christianity, I was rather set
in my conviction at that point on that particular issue, but rather I was lost
in the sense that I had not found what it is to replace that issue with in my
life. So in that way I was lost, but my father was unable to see that, and he
simply thought that I was lost in the way that, "I had strayed from Christ."
and that this was his effort to "bring me back to Christ in the only way that
he knew how." So that was it, he wanted me to go, and I had no choice in the
matter.

Of course, I knew I had a choice in the matter, but my choices weren't "to go
or not go" but rather, "To resist my father or not resist my father" and of
those two choices, I saw that the latter was much more certainly the path of
least resistance. I certainly did not want to go to this lecture, but I
thought, resisting my father, espcially considering my living arrangements and
my unwillingness to change them at that time, and simply "spacing out" the
experince and the lecture, and going in to zen ignore mode for an hour or
however long the lecture would be would be the path that would keep my soul
under the radar in the best way. It was quite a calculated decision on my part.

So the night of, I remember my dad driving me to UTD, and on the way there, my
dad put on a CD I know that my mom has had for some time, of Beethoven, because
he knew I liked Beethoven. This CD, however, well, it was "Beethoven's greatest
hits" or some other such absurd notion, as if Beethoven created singles and
these were his top selling platinum albums. I found it so amusing, because it
really showed my dad's lack of understanding of my pleasure with Beethoven. I
enjoy Beethoven to study him, and just listening to classical music casually,
such as driving to or from somewhere to have it in the background I find quite
pretensious, and I would much rather, in almost all situations, to have silence
rather than any sort of background noise. I found this all quite amusing, and I
said, "You can play whatever music you want, I don't care" and my dad in reply
said, "But you like Beethoven, don't you" and I remember saying, "Yes, I do,
but you don't have to play him like this" and my dad said, "Well if you like
Beethoven, then I'll play Beethoven, that's okay." I just said, "Okay
whatever." This was his whole idea anyway, and if he wanted to try and placate
me with the music that I liked, which I suspect is what he was trying to do, or
at least, I had the suspicion whether or not their is any truth to it or not,
then so be it. I can only speak for myself, I can not speak for my father, and
for myself I can say that I thought he was being manipulitave by playing music
that I liked. My father's true intentions we will never know.

Anyway, we made it to the venue, and we found a place to park, and made our way
to the lecture hall.

The presentation itself was very much what you would suspect. I don't remember
the time line of the things that he talked about, but if I had to guess, he
probably opened with some sort of touching "God" story, and followed up with
something about his book that he was selling, and then went on to make his
points for "the validity of the Christian viewpoint" as such. Well, he made all
of the arguments I have heard before, and such arguments are not worth going
over really. I will go over two of them that struck with me the most.

The first was simply a quote, something like this. "The man of science is
climbing the mountain tirelessly, in the hopes to discover something of their
athiestic viewpoint, but when they get to the top they will come to discover
that the man of God had already climbed there." I remember this quote, because
my dad, in our ride home, talked to me about it, and that I think is rather the
crux of my father's viewpoint on Chirstianity. "Science will discover the facts
of the bible to be true" is my dad's take on Christianity.

I have such the urge to provide a commentary on both of these statements, but
the tldr version is that both of them entirely miss the mark on what both
Science and Religion mean. Both of these quotes, the first one being so much
more self indulgant then the second, but both being incorrect in this way, seem
to indicate that "Both science and Religion are correct, and looking at the
world through this lens will show reveal the religion to be true." It's
something of a self-indulgent tendency to say, "Christianity has given us the
truth of the world, we are done, and science is simply behind it, but it will
catch up." Such a thing entirely misses the mark. I want to continue my
commentary, but that's apart from the story.

The second thing I remember from this whole thing was the comment that "Since
there is such a thing as absolute truth, then there must be a god, otherwise
where did that absolute truth come from." Basically, it was the most straw man
attack of agnosticism. The agnostic might say, "There is no such thing as
truth, what is true for you might not be true for me" and he gave the rather
thin argument that "By saying that, you are creating an absolute truth." It's a
circular argument, and again, I don't want to provide too much commentary on
it.

I have thought, at some point, I want to create my defence of my own viewpoint
in opposition to this man. Because the last thing thhat I remember about this
lecture was that the man was very aggressive. He took questions at the end of
his lecture, and his approach to these questions was to, "Not let these men
speak, and inturrupt them and poke every hole I can in whatever it is they may
say that could be incorrect so that they are not allowed to make a valid
point." That was my impression of him, not only in the question taking, but
also just in the sense of his whole presentation.

So as we came back, my father wanted to discuss some of these things in the car
with me, and proceeded to reflect back these silly arguments for Christ to me
in the car. Something also I remember is that the notion of suicide came up,
and I said that yes, I had thought about it, but not ever to the point wehre I
would act on it. And I remember my dad saying, "Sometimes, I wonder, when we go
out of town, if I should lock my guns up," and I said, "No, that's ridiculous."
And at the time, that notion was the first time even the thought of, "Would I
use my fathers gun to kill myself." ever came up. It was such a remote thought
that I never even had it before that point, so I just shook my head and said,
"No, that's ridiculous," and that was toward the end of the conversation.

Since then, I have had this thought, like, "That is such an absurd thing by my
dad. If I were to kill myself, why would he think that I would use his gun to
do it. What a narcisstic asshole that man must be to think that his gun would
be the insturment of my suicide. What an abolutely absurd idea." But again, I
want to hold myself back from making commentary.

So when we returened home, I remember going back into my room, and watching
Carlin. I watched his classic skit on religion. I know it rather well actually,
the "Religion is Bullshit" skit. And I laughed, and I thought, "It's amazing,
one 8 minute bit by Carlin can right everything that was wrong with what that
man just said," and I was content. My father's wish had been satisfied, and I
was able to purify my mind with some Carlin. 
