So the dream I had last night reminded me of homeschool things we would go to.
It reminds me most particularly of youth and government. I was there, and we
were going over some things.

Luis was there too, as was Kyle, and my mom.

We did some exercises. I forget precisely what they were. They involved getting
materials and putting togethr something. When we were done, it had five pieces
on it like a train. I also remember there being something going on with eating
some of the pieces, but they weren't made out of what you would consider food.
I don't remember that much, and it wasn't pleasant.

There was another kid, he I really didn't like this kid. He was obnoxious. He
was throwing some sort of tantrum when we were done. So I took him, swept him,
and mounted him, and kept him in mount. He was screaming that he was hurting
and crying, but when I looked in his face he was smiling half evilly, and half
out of fear, back up at me. I got high up on mount so that he couldn't use his
arms, and I squeezed him together with my legs a little.

My mom was looking on with great concern, and said multiple times that I should
let him go and that what I was doing was wrong, and the kids mother mostly
looked on. After the incessant urging of my mother, I let go, and the kid
started crying, and ran to his mother. I felt no sympathy for him.

My mom began to scold me, and I insisted that he was okay, that mount didn't
hurt him, and if anything it did him some good. The mother of the child was
holding him, and said something like, "It's okay, I trust you didn't hurt him,
he's just no used to that."

It was raining outside. The place was like the porch to the montgommerries,
best I can remember it. There was something that needed to be grabbed, and I
was assigned to go and get it. I was given the keys to a particular car, but
there were about a half dozen parked along the driveway there, so it took me a
bit to discover which one it was. By the time I realized it, the mother, who
knew which car, had gotten there about the same time, and told me not to worry
about it. I still persisted on getting whatever it was that was in the car.

Around this point I woke up.

The next dream was a crossfit dream. What I remember about this dream is two
things. First, there was an entire round where we did something like five
crossfit events, and at the end of it I realized that those five events were
the practice events, and we were statritng back at the first event. The first
event, I remember, was three rounds for time, of 25 overhead squats, 25
overhead walking lunges, 25 overhead walking lunges back. The overhead squats
were done with a box, and the lunges were done with a sandbag.

I completed the event in 6:50, which was by no means close to first, but not
last either, and I was rather proud of the time.
