# 20181109
So I have not been keeping up with my dreams at all in the past few days. The
last nights I have had what I consider perhaps less than interesting dream
fragments. The only one I really remember was one where I was in a room, and
there was a small snake. I don't know what kind of snake this is, but it was
like a surgical tube in width and say three feet in length. It was either blue
or yellow, I forget which, I think blue, and there was a snake charmer. The
snake charmer was showing me the method by which he charmed the snake, and was
able to grab it at a certain point at it's neck, so that it wouldn't turn and
bite him. I asked him if the snake was poisonous, and he said yes. He then told
me to go ahead and give a shot at charming the snake. So I tried to charm the
snake, but as I did, I didn't get high enough on the neck, so it slithered
around. I could tell it was about to bite me, and it came to my neck, and bit
me at the aorta. I felt it in the dream rather strongly, it was not pleasent.
When it bit me, I grabbed it, and threw it away from myself. The snake charmer
I remember was a bit humored by this, and told me that he could do nothing,
since the snake bit me in such a crucial point of my bloodflow, so I was
essentially fucked. However, I knew in a way that this was a dream, so I wasn't
worried about dying, but I did reflect on how much that bite caused me
psychosomatic pain.

I had a few other dreams in the past few days, but taht was the only one that I
really remember, and I know it was part of a much longer dream, and that this
was only a segment at the end, but I remember the rest of the dream being
pretty insignificant.

So the dream I had last night was this. I was back at UTD, and everything was
arranged in how I remember it from when I went to school there. I wanted to
practice some ultimate, so I grabbed some discs, and a soccer ball, and I went
to the fields. These were the fields where I used to play noon gang on, the
fields that I think are not there anymore. So I went to these fields, and I
took out my discs, and I took out the soccer ball, and I began to set up an
area where I could practice. At the scene, there were two other things going
on. First, to mention, there were at least three fields going across, at
different levels, where irl there was only ever one field across. So I was at
the center field. Then, to the west, there was a full on soccer team with a
coach who was in practice, and to the east was an empty field. As I was setting
up, a couple other guys were coming up to also practice. I remember being
rather annoyed by them. Since there was an official team that was practicing,
they wanted us to put these nets up between us. They were quite an amazing
thing to behold. They were full size nets, that went up to say twenty feet
high, and were powered by a central controller. Around the two fields
unoccupied were gray nets, and then between them there was a red net, and then
the other field had it's own perimeter of gray nets. So I was working to put
the nets down, but as I went there, I saw that the other guys who were gonig to
practice were putting the nets down, and they had it covered. So I think little
of it, but then they start playing with my soccer ball, (they were two soccer
players) and also playing with the nets, putting them up and down, and not just
placing them down (they came down from the top). I was getting very annoyed by
these soccer players, and eventually I said, "Hey, just put the nets down
already, the coach is going to get mad if you keep playing with them." They
didn't stop playing with the nets, so eventually the coach does come over and
expresses her discontent with these people putting the nets down. I empathised,
and I said, "Yeah, that's what I was trying to tell them." At the coach coming
over, they conceded and brought the nets all the way down. We were then on the
far right field, and at this point they kicked all of their balls up between
the red net to the second field, and I came across with them and asked them
about my ball, because I couldn't find it, and asked if they kicked it across
as well. They sort of shrugged and went about practicing. I was at this point
rather furious with these little assholes, and went back down and sure enough
there was my ball there and they hadn't kicked it with them. I picked up the
ball, which was distinctive because it had the face of a pug printed on one
side, and I brought it with me to the top field. As I came back under the red
net, I saw one of the soccer players practicing his penelty kicks, and kicked
the ball really hard, and got it in just in the corner, and then got on his
knees and put his hands in the air, as if that were part of the routine that he
had to practice to be a soccer player. I wake up around this point.
