# 20180910
So last night's dream was sort of weird.

It was also strange, because I woke up and immediately said to myself, "Oh, I
guess I had a dreamless sleep," but then as I thought about it, I had a very
vivid memory of this dream.

So this dream has something of two sections. The first section takes place near
the dream version of the bay, that is, the version of the bay that I have had
in other dream locations. It's not the shack, in fact, it would be quite a ride
on a boat to get to the shack from this dream location. But it's at the bay.
It's a wide open area, but it's certainly arranged in a circle, and on the
shore, there is a set of buildings, or rather, an array of piers might be the
better way of describing it.

So in this dream, it has nothing to do with jetskiing or boating, like this
place has been in previous dreams, but instead, it has to do with some ice
there. I remember, there were a lot of people there, some little rugamuffin
black boys are what come to mind as the "background people" and in the
foreground, I know, were me, Tim Franda, and his mother Mrs. Franda, as I know
her.

So we were there, and we were studying this thing about the water there. There
was an area, where the shore came out into the pier, where there was a block of
frozen ice under the pier. It was like a sheet of ice that went against the
shore. So we were standing on that, and observing it.

I don't remember what exactly about it we were observing, just that it was
there mostly, and that it was "attached" to the shore. At this point, I
remember them talking about how it will stay attached, and how it will be a
long time before it removes itself from the shore.

Well, as we were there, standing on it, I remember thinking, "It's about time
for it to break, right" and I started examining the edges of this sheet of ice,
where it met the pier. I noticed that it sort of went under the shore, as in,
the water went under the pier there, and it was frozen under it, and I remember
prying at it with my fingers, to see how deep it went. Eventually, after enough
prying, it became loose. We were all there, and we sort of jumped off, and were
a bit surpised about it. It was like, "Oh, okay, it's loose now," and everyone
started adjusting their stance and such due to this.

So now that we loosed this chunk of ice, I remember attempting to get it out of
the water. I remember standing on the pier there, and reaching under the water
to get to the bottom of the ice, and then pulling it up on to the pier, so that
we could examine it more closely.

It's around this point that the scene warps to the new location. This location
is on wake forest. And I can honestly say that in this location, dream north
actually cooresponds to irl north. So we were facing north, and we had gotten
this chunk of ice and placed it on a table there.

It turns out it was something like two chambers. In one chamber, there was a
red substance, and in the other chamber, there was a green substance. And we
were trying to, using the kitchen tools at our disposal, make the two
substances come out evenly on each side of the chambers. So I remember, the red
side, which was on the left, was higher than the right. So then I remember Tim
saying, "I think, if we put vinegar in the right side, it will even the two
sides out."

I disagreed, but I wasn't entirely sure, but I said that I thought the vinegar
would react with the salt and cause greater pressure in the right chamber, and
it would actually make them less even.

Sure enough, when Tim poured the vinegar into the right chamber, it reacted
with the salt (which I don't think vinegar reacts with salt but whatever) and
it caused the green side to deplete, and the red side to go down.

So I then said, "Hm, this is what I thought would happen, okay, how about we
increase the pressure in the left side, and that will at least counterbalance
the pressure caused by the vinegar." I then thought about using a pump which
only acted as a means to decrease the volume of the left chamber, and I
thought, "I wonder if that is okay, because redcuing the volume will more
forcibly push the liquid into the other chamber, since the chamber is so full."
I then thought, "Well, one way to increase the pressure of something is to
decrease the volume, so this is how this works." So I started to decrease the
volume of the left chamber with the pump, and started to push some of the
liquid in the left side to the right.

So now, at this point I don't remember what happened. I want to say either my
dad, or my grandfather, or someone else, old man ish, came up, and came to
observe what we were doing wrong, but didn't offer any advice. Or they might
have offered some advice, but I don't remember it or didn't understand it.

It was around this point that I woke up.
