So this is going to be a sort of free writing and brainstorming session. I will
allow my thoughts to go whereever they may, and let my mind write down whatever
I feel.

So there is something that is going to be difficult in doing this, and that is,
that when I am writting down my thoughts, it is more difficult to let them flow
naturally. This is for two reasons. The first I think is that the act of
writing forces the thoughts to slow down. Something like an acid trip scene in
Rick and Morty allows for so many different themes to pile on at once, and
everything and every thought has such a short level of existance, something
that is more like what thoughts are actually like, but when you write, those
thoughts that you are having are being had as you are writing the thoughts that
you had before.

But I want to do this for this reason. Nick has just presented to me a new
project, something that is to be done for performance matters. It is to be a
standalone app, that works similar to the background worker, and the way it
works is that it will perform some processes for performance matters, and it
will do these things, and send them to an FTP or something.

Here I am already running in to the problem of having too many thoughts and not
enough time to write them out. I just stopped writing, and was thinking about
various things. So lets go back to that, and return to where I was.

The thought I am having is, that the things that the app does should not be
hard coded. It should be it's own thing. Performance matters should be able to
specify some queries, whatever queries, and change something like a query file,
and with that query file, it would do what it needs to do, and with that, it
would do the things. So instead of trying to hard code the work that the thing
will do, instead, it will just do the work that it is told to do by something
that is more liquid than the thing that is doing the work.

How interesting.

So I am getting befuddled now. My thoughts are like a storm, and I am only able
to get some strings out now. The first thought is that I need to think about
what already exists, and based upon what already exists for performance
matters, I need to decide in what way this will be able to fit into the
paradigm that I have thought of. So what already exists, according to what Nick
has said, is something like a query file, that I have written down, that has
all the pep queries, and then there is something in the place where things get
done. I need to go there and see.

So there is an existing screen in alliant called AVBDataCollection, which is
what is already taking things from 2.0 and putting them into this.

So I need to look in to what this screen does, and check out all of the
functiounality, and based upon that, I need to see if it can be encapsulated in
this sort of structure that I have set up.

I think, as a sort of preliminary thought through, something I should ask
myself for these functions on this screen, I need to come up with what this
structure that I have thought of is. Something like, "Collect Metadata, run
queries and build datasets, convert that into CSV objects, and then export."
Something like that.

I also want to have a meeting at some point, detailing everything that I do,
and collect it. I really want to use C#, I am thinking that this should be an
interface, where the process of the thing gets automated.

I am also thinking of something similar to what I did with my lit analyzer,
although I am not totally satsfied with the paradigm that ended up coming out
of that. I like the idea of defining a bunch of delegates and assigning various
functions to these delegates, so that at any point in the pipeline, if you want
to replace a particular function, it's as easy as assigning that delagate to a
new function, but it left something to be desired.

What did it leave to be desired? Firstly, something that I think is
non-trivial, is my abuse of extension methods to achieve what I was doing. It
was somewhat gross, if I'm being totally honest, and abusing extension methods
in the way that I did very much goes against something of a cohesive
object-oriented model. It's not right.

But what I dislike about having something of an arbitrary interface for these
system options is that changing one system option will explode the number of
required instantiations of the class. That is, suppose there are two binary
options, and option A effects function A, and option B effect function B, but
option A does NOT effect function B, and vice versa. In this scenario, there
would be duplicated design for to different children, there would be the case
when A is on and B is off, and the case when A is on and B is on. In this case,
function A stays the same, but we would need to make a new child class because
function B would require a different implementation.

There must be a way to rectify this scenario.

Would it make sense for there to be an interface for each function? This does
not solve the problem, because if you make a class which extends Interface A
and Interface B, you would still need a new class which also extends Interface
A and Interface B, which would have a duplicated function A, and a different
function B. So this is not the solution.

Essentially what we need is a way to have a sort of switch. We want to have a
property of a sort of settings class, and depending on the value of that
property, a certain function would be used for a particular delagate.

