# 20180627 Intro to the journal - Brothers Karamazov leading to a visit with my father

So I am getting to a point in my life where I feel like my life is becoming a
really interesting story, a story that will be worth telling in perhaps
autobiographical format at some point. However, and this is a difficulty that I
have had in the past with my tale of Delita, and that is my memory of things is
not quite clear on certain details of the story that can sometimes be very
relevent to how things play out. And even if my memory is totally correct, the
act of actively trying to conjure up memories of things that happened even just
two years in the past is proving to be difficult, and one can only imagine that
conjuring up memories like this is sure to have so hindsight 20 20 glasses
going on, so this is my attempt to acheive a few things.

One, I want to write more. I have just gotten to the point where I can think
words in dvorak and they come out onto my fingers in pretty quick pace, so I
want to harness that and really make my typing ability become ingrained into my
subconscious so that I can really reap the benefits of switching keyboard
layouts. On top of that, I want to get used to the idea of writing down things
that might seem very long or very perhaps even cumbersome, but when read back
don't take very long to read. That is something I have noticed is that, when I
write, I write in very consice thoughts, and I'm afriad to venture to far on
tangents because when you write a tangent, it seems like you are on that
tangent for a very long time because writing take a very long time to do in
comparison to thinking or reading, but when you read it back it feels
disjointed because I don't stay on those tangents for very long, and the reader
is left to wonder why the writer is constanly cutting all of his tangents
short. It makes it seem as though I want to say something but that I am
constantly going back to the thing I stemmed from, which, like I said, creates
very disjointed and disorienting writing.

The second, is that I want to remember these things, my feelings, emotions,
thoughts, and etc, as they are still fresh in my memory. This journal is not
intended as a thereputic tool (although, surely it can be used as such in
certain times, and any journal and writing in general is always in a way
thereputic) but instead as a reflective one, a tool I can use to create a sort
of imprint of my emotions, of my actions, and of the events that happen to me
and those around me. I want this to be a sort of picture, a video of my life,
but this is better than a video because the reader consuming this medium has
access to the inner thoughts and emotions that go on inside of my head, where
as a consumer of video would have to infer that from the video being watched.
In a way, it is worse because the truth can be distorted through the lens of my
writing, but I will do my best to keep this metaphorical mirror as flat and
clean as possible, perhaps even making note of the places where the mirror may
be smudged or distorted so that the reader will know when something that is
being written is my perception of the truth rather than the raw unfiltered
facts of what happened.

So all of that out of the way, this first article will be a bit of a doozy, and
will be uncharacteristic of what I want this to be. What I want this to be is
my thoughts and emotions of the events of the day before, written in the
morning of the following day, in a way that puts the context of the day before
into my philosophical musings of this current day. However, I feel it neccesary
to start today with a whole background of what has happened to me over the past
8 months, since the day I got that phone call from my mother that my father was
diagonosed with Luekemia. But then that goes against the spirit of what I just
said, as if I went over that past 8 months, I would be conjuring up feelings
and emotions over those 8 months rather than reflecting on my current thoughts
and feelings of what is going on right now, so I am left in a bit of a quandry.
I think the best way to resolve this is to simply start at the start where I am
right now, and to go over the background of other things in my life before this
journal was started as they seem appropiate. So let's do that.

So I am currently section 2 part 1 chapter 1 of "The Brothers Karamazov".
Currently I have two translations of that novel by, one being the etext version
that I make annotiations in, translated by Constance Garrett, and the other is
the "everyman edition" or some such, that I bought at the store some weeks ago,
and is another translation by two individuals who I forget their names at the
moment. I have also just recently, this past weekend (so 4 days ago now) bought
a tablet to read on, and I have been reading on this tablet for the past few
days now, and I am liking that method quite a lot.

All of that preface to say, the themes and motivations of those characters, and
the events that happen to them, greatly remind me a lot of the various aspects
of myself. I read (I think on reddit somewhere) that when Dicken's and
Dostoeyevsky met (or maybe they didn't meet, and Dos. was simply commenting on
Dicken's words) Dickens said that he feels that he has two people inside of
him, always at opposition to eachother, and that each of these two people
together makes up the whole of who he is as a person, to which Dos. replied
"only two?" Indeed, I feel quite the same way as the Russian in this respect,
and I can see this sort of notion in a very crystal clear sort of way expressed
in the Brothers K. I very much have inside myself an Aloysha, but I also have
inside of me a Dmitri, and as much as I don't want it to be the case (and I
think most everyone would agree on this point) I have a bit of Fyodor in me as
well.

And to get to the point I am really trying to make, in the story right now,
the action is rising, Mitya has stomped the head in of his father, and Aloysha
is acting as a mediator between all of the crucial characters of the novel
(which creates a very cool dynamic of the story) and at the end of the day, as
Aloysha goes back to the monestary to rest for the night, he learns that Father
Zossima, his mentor and perhaps his true father figure in the story (if you
insist on analyzing it as such), is in poor health and will indeed come to his
death in the very near future. Aloysha, knowing this, talks about how he feels
his place is in the monestary, with the father, and that all other wordly
responsibities don't matter in comparison to the illness of this Zossima.

This feeling is much similar to the feeling I feel right now. Currently, two
days ago, my little brother Evan has finished his donation of stem cells, and
the process of transplanting the cells into my father (excuse my crudeness in
terms here, there is surely a much more elegent and scientific way of saying
this) has just begun. My father was admitted into UTSouthwestern a week ago,
where he was administered chemeo in some amount throughout the week in
preperation of this transfusion. This is a sort of end cap on the entire
process that has gone on for the past 8 months, my father having had 8
treatment of chemeo in that, along with regular appointments, spinal taps, and
other things which I feel guilty not knowing the full details of. And it is at
this end cap that I have this feeling that my place is with my father. I have
this feeling for two reasons, one being scarier than the other. The first
reason is because I feel that this process is difficult, and that as much
support as my father can get can only help, and that it is my responibility to
give him that support. The second, scarier reason, is that my father may die in
this process, and if he does, that means that there are things about our
relationship that I can never right. That is the scarier thing.

And that is where I come at this weird conflicting feelings. Obviously, the
death of my father is a scary thing, and any reasonable sane person when asked
if they would be okay with the event of the death of a their father would
obviously say they would rather their father not die, and that they would
prefer if he would keep on living. However, my emotions in this instance are
different, and are something I have been struggling with pretty much ever since
he was diagonsed. You see, what worries me more about his death is not the
actual grief of his death itself (although for sure I know I will experience at
least some grief, even if it is fleeting and not at all like what I imagine it
might feel like) but instead the anguish at having his death come to a point
where I feel our relationship is on a cliffhanger. My father and I have had a
very strange relationship over the past few years, not even talking about my
childhood, which I'm sure a hypnotist could find some buried thoughts and
memories and emotions of things that I have tucked away in there, but just in
the past few years we have been in a weirld place that is hard to describe. I
still have moments where I have lingering hatred (perhaps hatred is too strong
a word) resentment, bitterness, and overall distaste for him. I have moments
where I think to who he is, how I was raised (by both him and my mother), and
how we interact, and I have displeasure in our relationship, and these moments
where in the past have been simply me being dissatissfied with the relationship
and nothing more, now are associated with moments of guilt as I have these
thoughts, these thoughts of a man who is fighting against a terrible disease, a
man who is fighting it as he fights everything else in his life, and needs my
support and my love.

And the truly conflicting thing is, these thoughts have even gone so far as to
give me a sense of "well fuck him anyway". This is the truely disconcerting
thing. I have had thoughts that, well maybe he doesn't get past it, and that's
where the story of my relationship with my father ends, and maybe I'm okay with
that. I have never gone so far as to entertain the idea that "well maybe he
does deserve it" as certainly, though I do have these qualms about my father, I
don't believe that any human no matter how vile ever "deserves" anything, and
even if the concept of one human deserving something were a reasonable one, my
father would certainly not be one who would deserve the treatment he has
received by this disease in the least. Indeed, let it be known, though I have
my troubles and my issues with my fathers actions towards me and our
relationship, and I have my issues with his ideaology, and how he lives his
life and the choices he has made through it, I know that truely deep down he is
not a bad man, and quite on the contrary I know that he has a very strong sense
of selfless giving towards his family, which includes me his son of course, and
I don't want to say that I know he loves us, because the word love doesn't mean
much of anything without context, but I know that his sense of giving towards
family is strong, perhaps the strongest thing that he feels. Of course I am
only speculating, but this is something inside of me that I know to be true,
and I can only know it to be true in having this relationship of father and
son.

However, I still have these reservations, these feelings of anomosity towards
him, lingering from my own actions and our relationship as it evolved over the
past six or so years through my time in college and afterward. Of course, I
know these thoughts are simply thoughts I cannot help in myself, and that all of
my thoughts are the consequences of my upbringing, my life, and of the universe
that provides and generates all things.

Still, the point in all of this is that there is still a discord in the
relationship between me and my father. In fact I have talked with my mother
more than with my father about this relationship, and this is only something
that can't be talked about, but will only come in time. But now that the
possibility of time is limited, now that it's unsure whether time will persist
past this transplant, this is where my feelings come from, and this is where it
comes back full cicle to the protagonist Aloysha, who feels he should be with
his Father Zossima in his last days and with nothing else. I feel my place now
is visiting my father, I need to see him, to be with him. Is it selfish? Do I
want this simply so that I don't have to live with the idea that if he does
die, I will be able to tell myself I did all I could to get things in a less
disconcordant way than I would otherwise? I don't think it is selfish. Seattle
Brett might have treated this moment selfishly (and I do still hold that
everything we do as human beings in done selfishly in a certian sense) but now
I know it in myself that my feelings of needing to be with my father come from
something else, something apart from me. Of course, it is not apart from me,
but it comes from my meditation of this world, the observance of my thoughts,
not from trying to control my thoughts. It is this observer, who observes this
feeling, this feeling of needing to be with my father. I know intellectually
the selfish reasons for wanting to visit him more, which is why the thoughts
could appear in the first place, but the thoughts and feelings appeared quite
on their own, without the guidance of the ego and it is simply the observance
of them that I am feeling now.

I made a visit this past sunday, four days ago, and I actually visited twice
with a session of Bikram Yoga sandwiched in between. I want to make time to
visit him, but there are so many other things I want to pursue in my life right
now that it makes finding time for it difficult. However, this feeling is
strong, and I am glad, as my heart has been eased on one point having visited
him. When I visited, the nurse there had to administer a Lovanox shot to him,
which he had to do for me after my incident at the hospital, and that got us to
talking about my experince. Something I've said a few times, is that in a way
it's much easier to be on that side than it is to be on this side, and I hold
to that, although for me I was only on that side for a few days, where as he is
on that side, and has been for over eight months now, but we got to talking
about that again, and my dad can agree to an extent. I then mentioned something
which I have said before I know to my mom, and maybe to my dad as well, I don't
remember, but I said it during my visit this past Sunday, that I wish I would
have told them at the time of my incident, but I knew I was going to be okay.
And the way I put it was, "I don't if it was foolishness, or false knowledge, or
where that knowledge came from, but I knew that my numbness was temporary,
that it didn't feel permanent, and that I knew I would get back the use of my
left arm, and that I wish I would have told my parents that, because it seemed
so obvious to me that it was temporary, and I didn't know that they were so
worried about that." And to that, my father replied, that he knows too that he
will get through this transfusion as well. And the way he put it, he put in a
way that I know was not false, he spoke candidly, in reply to my words of
course, but that, in spite of the percentages and prognosises that people give
of him, he knows that he will survive through this. It's true, it's genuine, or
at least, it's as true and genuine as I know it can be being on this side of
the disease and not that one, and the doubts I have been having that perhaps he
might not make it through this (for indeed I have had doubts that I haven't
talked about in this article, but they are there), doubts which I have known
and I wish to false, those doubts I can at least supress in good conscious.
Yes, I felt guilty supressing those doubts before the visit, for fear that I
was not supressing doubts, but instead supressing a realist attitude towards
this situation, but now I know that they are true, honest to god doubts that I
feel, and I can supress them honestly, knowing they are doubts and not thoughts
of acceptance. Acceptance is important, but now is not the time for that, and
these thoughts are not thoughts of acceptance. And so I will visit, and so I
will rejoice in my life, in my feelings of "being there" (oh there must be a
better word for that), and I will rejoice in the lives that we share together.
I will continue to visit, without expectation, because that is what I feel I
need to do, not to gain anything for myself or for my father, or for anyone
else, but because I simply feel that my place is with my father.


