So last night I had a dream that I was playing ffxiv again. I was a warrior,
and I was co tanking with a casual raid group. As I was tanking the boss, I
went to provoke it, and the ninja pulled threat off of me. I then asked him if
he could use shadewalker or smoke screen in the future, and he looked at me
like he didn't know what I was talking about. I said, "Yeah, Shadewalker, it's
your level fifty Ninja class spell." and he still didn't know what I was
talking about.

We started going through menus, and he was fumbling through going, "This menu?"
when it clearly wasn't the menu for skills and such. So I took the controller
from his hand, and I navigated around, and I said, "Hm, it's been a while since
I played, and they've changed the UI since then, but I think it's this one,"
and the menu I clicked brought up a sort of map of all of the skills that you
acquire on your way to leveling Ninja.

I looked through, I was went straight to level fifty, and there I found
Shadewalker, and I turned it on. Then I said, "I don't remember what level
smokescreen is on, because that's the really important one to use to make sure
that people don't pull threat." And I went and I looked through and I checked
level 30, and that was a different skill, and I went and I looked through level
35, and I realized that he hadn't unlocked any of these skills. So I said,
"Have you not done your ninja quests at all?" and he said, "Yeah, but it's
okay, I don't need that in order to raid with this group, everyone is cool with
it."

At this point, I was livid, and I told him that I didn't want to raid with them
if they weren't going to even level up their characters all the way. The last
thing I remember was logging out of the game, and I heard the start of SM64 as
the guy was going back in to the single player content. I suppose my mind put
SM64 as the single player mode. That was the extent of the dream.

So I do want to provide a bit of commentary about this dream. So first of all,
the raid team most definitely represents BJJ on some level. Since BJJ is what I
used to replace my raiding time with, the fact that this is a casual raiding
team reflects my opinion of my current gym. This is compounded by the fact that
the person which represented the incompetent ninja looked very much like one of
the people, Christian, from Georges place.

