# 20181004
So last night I had a dream. It was a rather short dream.

So the scene was, I was in a room, and this room was sort of like a house. In
fact, now that I think about it, it was similar to the layout of the house in
the porn scene in the Big Lebowski. I was in the living room, and to my left
there was a bedroom, and to the right, there was a hall that went to a bedroom
and a restroom.

Regardless, on the tv, there was a preacher. I remember being in the room with
my dad and the topic of homosexuality was brought up. My dad irl is rather
homophobic, so it's always been a point of contention between us, not that I
really have a strong stance for homosexuality, but because my dad opposes it so
vehemently, any view other than, "it's exclusively wrong" is met by opposition.

So we were discussing this, and I remember making an argument. And I remember
talking to the preacher through the television, as if he were there in the
room, and in a sense he almost was, but at teh same time he wasn't. Anyway, I
talked to him, and I asked him, "Is homosexuality a sin?" to which he replied
that he believed that it was a sin.

So then I said, "so if a homosexual man were to recognize his sins, and marry a
woman for three months, would that man still be sinful?" and he said, "Well of
course, three months is not enough time to rid yourself of homosexual urges"
and the crowd agreed with him.

So then I said, "So if that same man were to marry a woman, and they stayed
married for ten years, then surely that wouldn't be simply a cover up, and
instead that would indicate that he has turned from his ways?" and the preacher
met me with a hesitant, "Well sure."

So then I finally said, "So at what point, in this process, does the man go
from sinful to not sinful? I don't understand. Why is it that at three months
he is still a sinner, but at ten years, he is not? How can homosexuality be a
sin if you can't draw the line as to where it is a sin and where it is not?"

And I felt like I had the preacher cornered, but of course my argument makes no
sense, and requires further analysis to say what is really going on. And the
preacher skirted the issue, and began talking about homosexuality as a sin
again.

This is about the extent of the dream.
