So last night I had a dream, and it was a really long and involved dream that I
think has a rather relevant and immediate interpretation.

So I don't precisely remember the beginning of the dream. I believe it had
something to do with the grocery store location that I have in my dreams
sometimes where there is a newsbooth at the exit. I believe Daniel and Jesse
were involved as well. Still, this is just the starting point of the dream.

The only relevant thing that happened here was that something happened to my
car. I remember getting out of the store, and going out to my car, and my car
either wouldn't start, or there was something wrong with it that required it to
go to the shop.

While my car was in the shop, for whatever dream reason that doesn't make sense
IRL, I couldn't go to work, and I couldn't go to my apartment. So I decided to
give my parents a call, and they let me stay at their place for the time being.

I remember in the dream a night goes by. I remember emerging out of the school
room, and coming in to the living room, where my mom was. She said to me "Look,
we need to have a discussion." She went on to say, "We don't want you staying
here for very long like you did last time, I need you to get an apartment, and
to get a job, and I would like for you to move out of here."

At first, I was deflated, because the prospect of looking for a job and finding
an apartment did not seem appealing to me. But then I came to my senses, and I
said, "Oh, it's okay, I didn't lose my job, I'm just missing a Wednesday, and
that shouldn't be too bad. So I still have a job. And when my car get's fixed,
I'll be able to get back to my apartment. So everything is okay, I still have
those things, I'm just here until my car get's fixed."

She felt a bit relieved about hearing that. She then said that she wanted to
tell me something. She showed me a map, which incidentally was like a civ5 map,
(which probably came up due to the incidence of coal being a very "civ like"
resource) where she showed me some streets, and she said, "Your father doesn't
want me to work in the coal mines, but I applied for a job anyway. He said he
doesn't want me to get black lung just to work, but I am applying for a job
that is "on" the coal mine rather than "in" the coal mine. So it's okay."

I was struck by two things here. First, I wasn't sure what to tell her, because
the idea of my mom working to support my dad was so foreign to me that I didn't
know how to react or what my opinion on it was. The second thought I had was
that this job, even though it was on the coal mine rather than in the coal
mine, would probably end up forcing her to work in the mine despite her
expressed intrest to avoid the mine.

As the thoughts went through my head, my mom said, "Okay, I can see you're not
so sure, let me show you." So we went straight from the civ map, and we walked
in to the area. There was a building, it had two sort of compartments. The
first was sort of like a visitor area, and then there was another room behind
that which led to the tunnels which went in to the mine. The rooms both were
not very large. Say eight feet across and twelve feet long. We stood in the
room which connected to the tunnels, and my mom said, "see, here is where I
would work, it's apart from the tunnels, so I could work and never have to go
in."

I was still skeptical, but as I was examining the place, there was, on the
opposite wall where we were standing, a ten year old girl in a dress standing
still looking at us with a blank stare. I looked at her, and my mom said, "Oh,
that's right, there was something else I needed you to do. These demonically
possessed girls have been around, and there are two of them that I would like
for you to exorcise, one at eight, and teh other at ten. The way you have to do
it is by eating a particular kind of cookie, and then with that cookie, you can
find the girl, and you will be able to send her back where she belongs. Each
girl is different, and each requires a different way of interaction to send her
back to "her proper place". I am having difficulty describing what this
actually means. I explore this "proper place" later in the dream.

So I eat a cookie, in this case a chocolate chip cookie, and I am able to see
on something like a heads up display, all of the information about this
demonically possessed girl. Using this information, I am able to send her to
the other place successfully.

My mom congratulates me, and tells me that this was something like a practice,
and that the other girls won't be as easy.

We return to our house, but it's different. It's a totally different layout.
I've seen this layout in other dreams before. You walk in to the main hall, and
to the left is some rooms, like bedrooms. I have yet to explore these rooms in
any dream I've had so far. To the right, there is a fork. Right of the fork is
the kitchen area, and left of it is something of an alcove which represents the
breakfast area.

Then, straight ahead from this area is teh backyard. The whole back wall is
composed of full length windows, and one of them is a door. This is the place
with the square in the ground with a water in it.

I walk to the fork, and I talk to my parents. They give me two cookies, and
they tell me that one of the cookies corresponds to the eight o clock girl, and
the other to the ten o'clock girl. She then says that it is relevant that I
know that the eight o'clock girl is deaf, and using that information I will be
able to find her.

So I walk outside, and I imagine that there will be a heads up display like
there will be for the first girl, but when I go outside, there is no heads up
display, and I have forgotten which cookie cooresponds to which girl. I was
told that this isn't practice anymore and that I needed to be more attentive.

So as we walk outside, and walked past the pool, we ended up getting to a
building. This building was a long building, with really tall ceilings (fifty
feet or higher) that came up to an arch. It's also a building I've seen in
other dreams, it was the location of a crossfit event. I was entering from the
other side this time though.

So I enter this large building, and it becomes crowded. There are pedestrians
walking around, and there are works of renessance art hanging on the left side
wall. Across from each work of art is usually some sort of pair, like a mother
daughter pair, and they are all standing as if captivated or possessed by what
they are seeing.

I am not sure which cookie to eat, there is a double stuffed orea and a regular
oreo, and if I eat the wrong one I feel that I won't be able to perform the
exorcism properly. I decide that I feel as though the eight o'clock girl
cooresponds to the double stuffed orea, so I eat that oreo and begin
investigating the possessed girls in this room.

So I reach the first girl, and I start to talk to her. She is holding the hand
of her mother. She responds and talks back to me. I ask her some questions, and
she responds with some girlish rant about god knows what. So I decide that,
since she could hear my questions, she isn't deaf.

I then move on to another girl, who is also holding the hand of her mother. As
I bend down to talk to her, I ask her something, and again, she responds. This
one is more shy, and is not as talkative, but I can tell that she can hear me,
and that this isn't the girl.

I then move on to a third girl. This girl is not holding the hand of her
mother. However, I'm still cautious because this isn't the identifing factor, I
need to see if she is deaf. So I bend down and begin to talk to her, and I ask
her some questions to see how she responds, and she does respond to me, but not
in relation to my questions. I asked her something and she began talking to me
as if rehearsing a prerehearsed talk about who she is and how old she is and so
on. I ask her something else, and she continues this way, not replying directly
to what I am saying, but instead going off on something completely different. I
am convinced that she is deaf, because she seems to be attempting to respond to
me the best that she can, but she is not at all answering my questions.

So I perform the exorcism on this girl, and as I do, she starts to depart
behind the wall she is standing against. She disappears behind the wall. At
this point, I am curious where she went, so I find a doorway along this wall,
and check the other side.

The doorway seemed very much like an employees only entrance, while the rest of
the place was very ornate and polished, this doorway, (and others like it) was
not for pedestrian use. So I go through this doorway, and on the other side, I
see a whole room that is a train station. Directly in front of me is the train,
and to the left of me are some stairs which lead up to a "booth" of sorts,
where there is a disgruntled man sitting at the controls.

I then look to the trains going by. They are regular passenger trains, and on
them there are a lot of unhappy people. The person at the controls is unhappy
as well. Then, on one of the trains, I see the girl sitting in one of the
chairs of the train. She waves out to this conductor as the train goes across.
The conductor suddenly brightens up, and waves happily to the girl. When the
train finishes going off, the conductor becomes dreary again, as he watches the
rest of the trains continue to go by as he does his job.

This is the end of the dream. I mentioned that this dream had something of a
straightforward interpretation, and what I have gathered is this. First, it's
literally a day before Thanksgiving, and Jason and Lacey are going to be coming
down with their girls. So the possessed girls, and the manner in which to break
their possession, is clearly a message about my understanding of how to
interact with them.

Also, my mother working in the coal mines is a message about attempting to
understand how my mother is interacting with my father during his battle with
Luekemia. The two things are connected by the first "practice girl" in the coal
mine building, and that connection becomes more loosly coupled.

The act of exorcism and subsequent following of the girl on the train has to
represent some sort of transformation of Jason's girls to a new stage in their
adolesence. I have not seen the girls in a long time, and so they will be
surely different this time seeing them.

Also, of note, I am very apprehensive about the girls coming to see my dad. I
am very wary of what will become of it. This dream is at least some sense of my
mind preparing myself for this visit.

I am not sure what the conductor represents. This character is very striking to
me as something magical, but I don't know what it could be.

--

So something I want to say is that there are times when I am sitting here, and
I feel like there is something that needs to be said or expressed, but I don't
know what it is, and what ends up happening is I end up consuming media
en-masse for god knows what reason, and in doing so, I supress my need to think
about these things. Perhaps I am hoping to find something in media that has
already expressed the ideas that I am struggling with, and in so doing, I can
feel maybe a little better in that my ideas are out there.

But right now is one of those times. I feel like there is something that I need
to express, but I don't know what it is or what it is that I am even grappling
over. I just finished listening to Bret Weinstein talk with Dave Rubin about
the two topics he talks about, and they also mentioned an event between Bret
and Hawkins about the nature of memes and their influence on cultural genetics,
and about a point of contention between the two of them regarding the genetics
of the whole thing. I finished listening to Dave Rubin's podcast, and I
entirely want to find this discussion, but I think that it is not up or
available at the moment, and will probably be posted some time in the future.
Probably mid December if I had to guess, although I don't know when the evnet
was actually held, so I don't know.

But regardless, that still leaves me with something to be desired. I have
something I feel like I want to express, but I don't have the means at my
disposal to express it. Something is inside of me, wanting to break free, but
it's not going to, and I don't know what it is.

I think this is why I usually don't write when I feel this way either. It feels
like no matter what I write, it's just a futile effort of not acheiving
anything. Like, what is inside of me is some profound idea, but it's not going
to come out in this format.

I could maybe tell a story. I haven't really done that yet. But I don't know,
it seems like to me that it's not the right way to do this. I don't even know
what the idea is that I need to get out, and I don't have a premise for a
story. Maybe I could come up with some sort of prompt, and go from there.

Let's try writing something like Phantases.

--

Henry Voltaire, (who we have to name Henry Valtion to make it seem like he is
somehow original and not at all a metaphor for Voltaire) sat on the edge of his
bed with his head in his hands. He was struggling with something, but he didn't
know what. It seemed as though he was on the verge of grasping something
fundamental about the way that electrical current has potential for great
things, but he wasn't able to put his finger on any sort of formula to describe
it in some abstract way.

He looked up. On the wall of his bedroom was a mirror. He looked into the
mirror. "What is compelling me to do this?" he asked himself. "Maybe it's
because mirrors are the stereo typical way that someone might be led into a
fantastical world. So in order to transport myself to some other realm, I have
to look into something."

So he looked into the mirror, and of course, since this is a story about a man
that goes to some new strange world, he started to see an entire world behind
his mirror self. He looked behind him and he saw the other wall, but when he
looked at that wall in the mirror, he saw the image of horses jumping over
fences. These horses started as simple drawings of horses on the wallpaper
jumping over simple drawings of horse fences, but as he looked deeper, he
started to realize that the horse was trancending the plane of the wallpaper.
He looked deeply at the horse.

Now, because this is going to transport him into an unknown world, there are a
few things that have to happen. First, he has to look at the blank wall behind
him, and see nothing. Then, after he looks in the mirror, he sees the horses on
the wallpaper. After he looks at the horses deeply enough, one of them turns
its paint drawn head from the plane of the wall and turns it to look directly
at Henry in the mirror. But when he looks back at the wall, he sees nothing but
a blank wall again. Then, when he looks back at the mirror, instead of seeing
his own reflection, he sees what can only be described as the ghastly form of a
demon. This demon has pale skin, so pale that it's white, with wispy black
hair, so wispy that you can see the scalp more than you can see the hair. The
demon then reaches through the mirror, and grabs Henry on the arm. Henry
recoils, because if some pale demon thing was pulling you through a mirror you
would recoil to, but he finds that the more he struggles, the bigger and more
imposing the demon becomes. When Henry starts to realize that the demon isn't
going to let go, he turns back and looks at the demon. He looks into his eyes,
and finds that they are black, as if with the darkest eyeshadow that you could
buy, but this eyeshadow is a part of his eyelid, and when he makes eye contact,
the demon begins to smile. The smile is large and sinster. The man sees the
demons crooked teeth, and they are yellow with plaque. The demon is quite
repulsive.

Henry wasn't sure what to do. In one version of this story, the demon grabs him
and pulls him under. But in another version, he grabs his pocket knife and cuts
off the hand of the demon. And in still another version, he cuts off his own
hand. But that's not the version of the story that happens. In this version,
the demon says, "You are mine." and his voice is such that it echos and reverbs
through the head of Henry. The echoing and reverbing shake his sense of being
to the point where he can't resist being pulled into the mirror by the demon.

Henry is thrust into the mirror. It seems like the most appropiate thing to
happen at this point in the story is for Henry to feel like he is being pulled
into some sort of abyss. Everything is nothing and nothing is everything. That
dosen't make any sense, but neither does this story. When asked about it in an
interview later, Henry said, "It was like my soul was being taken from my
body, but that doesn't make any sense." The interviewer than asked him how that
was possible, and Henry said, "I only feel like it's possible because I am able
to write about it later." Henry answered 
