# 20180904
So it's been a couple of days since I actually sat down and wrote here. There
are a couple reasons. The first is, I haven't really had many dreams the past
couple days. Part of me thinks that perhaps I am all dreamed out, that if my
capacity to recognize my dreams is like a well, I have dried out and exhausted
that well, that the well is exhausted of giving me the water, that I haven't
done enough with the images I receive except write them down, and so my dream
self is tired of trying to perceive these images without any noticable feedback
from the conscious self. That's just a theory.

The second reason I haven't written here is because, well, last weekend was a
long weekend (today is Tuesday and I had yesterday off) and I took Sunday as an
"Off day" from this sort of pursuit, and that off day sort of bled in to
yesterday as well.

And the final reason is, I have started keeping physical journals as well. I
went back, and I looked at some of my old Seattle notebooks, and I found the
King and the Dragon story (and I had it this way rather than the other which I
found interesting) and I read it, and that version of the story resonated so
much more strongly with me than the typed out version, that I had to imagine
that something was going on there. So I went to wal-mart, and I bought a few
more simple spiral notebooks, and I deginated some of them for different tasks,
and I want to try my hand at taking physical notes for a time. I think it will
help.

I have started reading HGWells "Outline of the history of the world" and I have
decided that I want to try my hand at note taking with that. The idea is, I
want to read it, and then be able to distill the ideas and proper names, and
everything else in to a form that I can go back and read on it's own merit. So
I could open up my notebook for this work, and without the work in front of me,
I could brush up on everything I read, and almost re read it through my notes.
Such a thing has an advantage for two reasons. The first is, I am very
interested in reading my own work. For whatever reason, I get exhausted and
bored and I want to "get through it" as quickly as possible when I read
something like cliff notes or spark notes on something, but I think if I had my
own notes, and if they were well put together (which I will experiment with a
little bit and see, but I am trying my hand at the Cornell method of
notetaking) then I could read through the notes as if they were their own
independent work, and I will be able to collect and recall the things that I
read in the original story in a much cleaner way.

Such a thing also got me to thinking about my lit analyzer, and I think it
might be correct to collect notes for this in this way as well. But as I
thought about it, I think, what makes the most sense to me, is that the concept
of parallel source is what will make the most sense.

The thing about this whole thing is, it seems to me at least, or to put it
another way, in order for this to work, I must break down the original work
into appropiately small sections. So I have made notes on Well's work for two
sections so far, and each section was something like 150 lines long, which
would amount to about five or six pages if I'm not mistaken, depending on the
typesetting of course, but still, it's a rather digestible chunk that the work
must be condensed down to, and I think for something else, for instance, the
Iliad, or worse, the bible, keeping notes like that would require the spliting
up of individual chapters into subsequent subchapters. And I am already sort of
doing such a thing with my scenes and such with my lit analyzer, but I think it
is important to split things in this way if I am to have success taking
physical notes in a physical notebook.

I'm really not sure where I am going to go with this. I think, what I am
getting at is, in order for my lit analyzer to work well, I need to somehow re
think the way that I put it all together. I have a vision in my head where the
headers go out in a tree like format, and when you select a tree, it opens up a
panel, and in this panel, there is the text of that portion of the tree, and
the user would be allowed to select a portion of that and say something like
"Make a subtree" or "Subdivide the tree" and such, and then there would also be
an area where the user could drag and drop things such as characters,
references, and things of that nature. And then I have the notion of a place to
write, where the user would write what I have been calling to this point the
ELI5 translation. And then, it would be this whole thing which would be the
method of taking notes that I could create, and it would be like the cornell
method of taking notes on physical paper, but it would have all of the sections
be panels in a windows form. This is the vision I have, but I'm not sure how
much of it actually makes any sense.

At this point, before something like that can happen, I must deploy my original
work. I like what I have so far, I'm just not entirely convinced that it's
entirely neccessary or as useful as I thought it would be at it's outset. I
need to have this way to create an "Overview view" or something like that.

Something also that I have thought, and when I go back and think about my
notes, is something that could be very helpful, I think I want to go through a
few iterations of reading. So the first iteration is just to read it without
the idea or concept of notetaking in my head at all. That is, just read a
section, or a chapter, or whatever, and just let it happen as it happens, and
read it, and let myself react to it in whatever way I react to it, and that is
that. Then, after this, would be a more thoughrough read through. And this read
through, any time I get to a point where I feel it neccesary to take a note, I
will stop, take the note, as if I were sitting in a lecture and taking the
notes (the right hand side of the cornell method of notetaking) and jot down
all of the things that seem relevent to jot down. Then, after this, I will go
down the left side, and mark through whatever proper names seem appropiate to
jot down on the left. Then finally, at the end, I would put the summary of the
experience on the bottom.

I'm not sure how much of this makes sense. A second idea that I have come up
with is to read the second time, but this time instead of jotting notes during
the reading, I would simply read with the intention of thinking about the order
of things, and the written word of things. In other words, I would put whatever
I read into a format that could fit into my short term memory, and then with
that short term memory, I would write out the notes on the right hand side
without the source material in front of me. I'm not entierly sure how I feel
about this. I am thinking in terms of the outline of the history of the world.
I could read something, and I would get the idea of what happened in the thing,
but then when I go to write the notes, what I am afraid of is that the notes
won't match the original text. This is not so big a deal in something like the
outline of the history of the world, I think, but if I were to do something
like this for Harry Potter, and I were to read a chapter, and read it again,
and try and summarize the chapter based upon how I remember it, and I get the
order of things mixed up, and then I go back and read these notes, I could get
lost as far as what goes where.

At the same time, I want there to be some sort of memory retention aspect in
play here. So this is the sort of back and forth that I go between. In the
first way, the way where I look at the original source as I make the notes, I
run the risk of simply copying down the original source, but doing my best to
paraphrase in a way so that it becomes "my own words" and I don't want to do
that at all. This is very similar to the headers that I have put so far in my
notes for the lit analyzer, is that I go paragraph by paragraph, and I will
have to come up with a header, and the header is something that is like the
beginning of the paragraph, but I always feel like I must include everything in
the paragraph in condensed form. So I end up creating some sort of frankenstien
of a header that says, first this happens, but then this person felt this way
about it, so then that happens, and this results in a final thing happening and
a certain person feeling left out from it. Such is what happenes when I try and
look at the source material of something, and simply regurgitate the material.

So then the danger of the other way I have already described, I might write
something down as "this is what happened" but I am afraid that what I write
won't be what really happened.

So something I have just thought of is this. Perhaps I am getting at my lit
analyzer all wrong. I am thinking right now of the chapter I am at on the
possessed. I could very easily (if the chapter was fresh on my mind, I read it
last night and have not read it again since I woke) write out what happens in
the chapter, first, Nikolay bites the ear of the governor as they try and go
through the episodes that have been occuring lately, and he starts to go crazy
when he is placed in jail, whereupon we realize that he is suffering from some
sort of brain fever, and when he is released, he then goes and apoligizes to
Liputin for his outbreak at his party. So this would be the whole sumarry of
the chapter.

And what I have been trying to do so far is to place the source material, the
text, and to protray upon the text what happens here. But I think this is
incorrect. To come up with these things, I think these things are what is
important to talk about in the novel.

I have had this issue where I am not sure how to break up certain things. First
off, there is the trouble of, sometimes chapters have a sort of cliffhanger to
them, and when the scene goes over chapters, I am forced, in my current method
of note taking, to go over the chapters, and create a new scene.

More, I have been having the issue of what I should do when the author
"sprinkles" things through the work. THat is, for instance, in Mistborn, where
Sanderson sprinkles bits about his worldbuilding throughout the work, I want to
have a way to seperate out the worldbuilding from the rest, but it seems wrong
to create a new scene for this whole ordeal.

So I think I have a new idea for how to do this. I have the idea as this. And
it might be best for me to draw this out, and I will draw it out after I
explain the idea, but I feel I must explain it here in words in order for it to
come out on the page.

So first, there will be the source material, subdivided however it may be be
that in chapters or books and chapters or books and chapters and sections, or
whatever, on the far left. So the far left would represent the files of the
novel. This would be in a tree structure. It is not trivial how this would come
about. Regardless, the user could click on one of the files, and the source
text of the file would appear on the right of it.

Next, on the far right, would be the litelms. This would be a similar sort of
structure, but different. And at the start of a new novel, there would be no
lit elms, or maybe, differently speaking, there would only be one lit elm. In
fact, now that I think about it, this would be a good time to create threads as
well. So there would be litelms, and there would be threads. I have not created
the notion of the thread yet.

So the user could highlight some aspect of the source text, perhaps a whole
paragraph, or a sentence, or multiple paragraphs, whatever. In fact, maybe
highlighting is not the ideal way to do this, maybe I could create some sort of
sliders to select out certain portions. However it is done, when this text is
selected, I would then have a button that says, "Add text to lit elm" So the
select text would get inserted into the selected litelm as part of that lit
elm.

What this does, is it forces me to read something, and then create the elms
based upon what I read.

I am still missing something though. I want to have threads be a feature of
this whole thing as well. And I need to figure out how a thread is defined as
well.

So I think the way I have litelms defined so far is almost correct. Almost
correct. I think I want to preserve the idea that one could create the original
source material from the litelms. That is, the litelms would be created in such
a way that a depth first traversal of the elements, writing the source of each
element, would generate the original file.

So it's really the threads that I need to work on. I must come up with the idea
of the thread.

So I want to create a plan for this whole thing. First, I need to create the
interface for this thing. I will draw it out right now, actually. Once this
interface is in my head, I will be able to think through how I want to
implement threads. 
