# 20180814
So last night I had no dreams. In fact, last night I was very unmotivated to do
anything. I ate over two pounds of fish, which was good (I was hungry, and fuck
me I just realized I have gotten to work without avocado or nuts) and so when I
got to my place, I was mostly just motivated to lay down, or sit down, and do
pretty much nothing.

I am surprised I had no dreams last night. Or rather, I do remember having
something of a dream, but I woke up and went back to sleep and entirely forgot
my memory of it, what it was about, what it may have entailed, any of it. I
could start exploring my subconcious, and start exploring what the dream may
have been by creating connections, and going from there, but that sort of
excersize I am not interested in at this moment.

I have started experimenting with how I want to annotate things when I read. So
far, I have mastered the concept of tagging things (rather, I have hotkeys in
vim that do so). What I want is a way to navigate around the novel in a simpler
way. As it is, I was left going up and down a bit, and losing my place, and
having to read and re read certain bits just to get back to where I was, which
is not ideal of course. I have not actually installed the tags writer on my
tablet yet, well, because like I said, it's still in pre-alpha, and I know it's
not ready for alpha release at all. It's not wrapped around the controller
properly, and the interface is not there yet at all either. It just does
hardcoded what it should do, which is great but exactly ready for testing by
myself yet. So the goal at this point is to get it into alpha some time by the
end of the week.

I want to explore something. I think I have decided that salmon is not the
ideal nutrition for me, as any time I have eaten salmon, I have always had a
headache, and at time I have had diarehha associated with it as well. So I
think that is a good indicator that Salmon is not something I should be eating.
It would be one thing if it were something like, "after I eat salmon I still
have cravings for something else." but instead I think this has to do with the
fact that salmon is not a good source of nutrition, at least, not in the same
way that beef is. When I eat beef, I will feel full, and if I don't cook it
enough, I will feel uneasy, but beef has not given me headaches, not in the
same way that salmon has. It is becoming a trend, and a trend I think that I
should take heart and listen to.

So yeah, there is not much to say I think on this very Tuesday. Life is, how
you say, good. But it's interesting. I'm not sure if it has anything to do with
the masterbation, but I have felt very unmotivated towards anything in the past
couple days. My "fuck it" attitude has come back in great stride, and well, I
find it interesting. I am much less interested in mythology and reading, and in
general I would say that I am feeling very "fuck it" is the best way to put it.

Part of me wants to go and write another chapter of my hermit story. Actually,
I think I will go do that. Right now, I'm at the point where Kimberly is going
to entice Damien to reveal the email that Brett is dead. Something like that.
It's going to be a difficult chapter for me to write, because, well, like I
have said in past entries, I have so little romantic experience, it's quite
appalling really.

God, I am still in this mood. I just spaced out for a good minute just there. I
just went and thought about a youtube video I watched last night. I was
imagining it for a good minute. It's amazing. When I'm not physically going to
youtube and watching videos for no reason, my brain is still attaching itself
to youtube and making reasons for it to go there.

Now I just spent something like five actual minutes browsing facebook. It's
seriously fucked.

I don't understand it. I wish I did. I just don't. Is it because I have a
headache? My headache is unmistakably there. Should I take some time off from
BJJ? I am feeling so slogish, useless, and etc right now. Like, I don't want to
do anything. I would rather continue to lie down and do nothing all day than be
here and do anything. Fuck consequences, and fuck life. That's the attitude I
feel right now. I feel like a useless human being. Let's not be useless. I am
going to make some tea, and come back. Tea is good. And at the very least, it
will force me to clean out my tea basket and flush through that garbage. So
that is good.

Okay, I'm back now, with tea. I have very little idea what I want to talk
about, but I do feel better as though I want to say something. I could lay down
and curl up into a...

I was about to say my mothers womb. I had to catch myself.

Something I have thought of lately, is I need to make my apartment livable. I
want to get rid of the chair, I need a new one, and I want a couch. The thing
is, the requirement is, that everything has to be moveable. This is something
that needs to be done. So let's come up with the list of things.

Chair.
Sleeping mat (my sailboat mat needs to change, I need some other sort of mat)
Couch
Computer desk
Ram
Bookcase
Lamp
Fan
Table and chairs

I am feeling very unable to conjure up anything right now. It is certainly some
sort of manifestation of the state of myself.

You know what, I should do actual work when I feel like this. It's the ideal
state of things.

I will watch some Peterson first though.
