# 20180701 Ramblings of a man in the haze of waking - Ramblings of the lit analyzer
So today it is now in the morning, where as yesterday it was the evening time,
like I said I would do in my article yesterday. In fact, I literally just woke
up, and I am still gathering myself as far as waking up and gathering my
senses. You might be able to tell by the lack of grace in my sentence
structure. Yeah, it's very stilted, as if I don't know what I want to talk
about, and I am simply just writing words for the sake of writing words. So be
it, words are fun to write anyway, although it is quite interesting, I can tell
that my writing is much slower than it usually is. I'm not sure if this is
because I am just waking up, or if it is because I have nothing to say.

I do actually have something to say, and I thought about writing about this
last night after I came back from the Roughnecks game, but I didn't and instead
spent my time trying and failing to go to sleep as I wholly decided I wanted to
read anything and everything that I came across, jumping from literary work to
work, even reading various synopses on wikipedia to see if I want to read them,
before finally coming to a mindless hearthstone tournament to ease my mind. I
have this idea for my lit anaylzer, as well as ideas for my workout logger, and
both of those projects have been neglected by me as of late, so I might end up
writing out my ideas for each of those and getting to work on them, and making
one of them my project for the day/evening. Regardless, lets go back to the
events of my life.

Last night I know I had a dream, and I remember having a sort of moment when I
woke up in the night, but not entierly woke up but just that half awake half
not awake at all state that you arrive at sometimes, and in this state I
remember trying to keep in my head some detail about this dream, but even at
the time I remember thinking that it wasn't worth remembering and that the
dream was wholly short and entirely boring, so I don't remember what happened.
If I had a nice dream, similar to the Seattle dream I had a few days ago, then
perhaps this whole, "wake up and start writing immediately" thing would feel
more natural, but as of right now it feels like I am simply writing for the
sake of it without getting anywhere. Although I do say, now that it is a few
minutes past getting into it, and I am beginning to wake up a little better,
this is starting to flow a little better. Actually, I think I will decide to
take a shower, go outside for a bit, collect myself, and think about what I
might want to write about, and come back and continue writing. Yes, let's do
that. I will return.

So I am back now from my walk, which took me about 30 minutes in total to
complete, and I am back and I have a few things I want to talk about.

The first is, I think I am spreading myself a little thin as far as my hobbies
and interests are concerned, and I have been having a hard time finding the
time to do all the things I want to do, and I am not making strategic choices
as to what to sacrifice. That whole point my lie wholey in that statement right
there, but I had this sort of strong feeling about it as I was nearing the end
of my walk, as I was talking to myself about my felony, which was the primary
topic of conversation on my walk. The second has to do with my feeling of out
of place ness at the Roughnecks game, which also might have the whole of the
idea expressed in that statement right there.

So I am definintely being spread thin as far as all the things I want to do,
and I very much ran in to this last night as I was reading from so many
different books and things. I have so many great ideas of things I want to
write and program about, but it seems as though by the time I end up doing
them, I get lost in them, and begin working on them, it's time for bed, and
it's back to the whole grind of work, sleep, eat, train, yoga, repeat, which is
why my work life is beginning to suffer, as that is the path of least
resistance for me right now. At least, it will be the path of least resistance
until I get fired, at which point finding a job will be the path of least
resistance, I think, unfortunately. So with all of that, one can imagine why I
don't want to dedicate myself to a girlfriend, as that would just be one more
additional thing that would occupy my time, and I don't want that.

I would like to brainstorm about the various things I want to continue on with
for my projects, so before I do that I do want to touch on breifly the game
yesterday. The game was a wholly boring game. The wind was a bit strong, not so
strong that the concept of throwing upwind was entirely impossible, but enough
to the point where upwind and downwind scores were just as important a
consideration as breaks and holds, so the way the game ended up going was the
Roughnecks went up by five or six and then proceeded to trade downwind points
with Austin Sol through the third quarter when I left. I sat in my two typical
corners, which were on the downwind side of the field, but even there there
wasn't much to see. The one thing I will say is that I was very impressed by
Steven Borik's play, and he is doing great things for himself for the team. He
was a defensive handler for the team, and he did a very damn good job at it,
finding holes and punching in upwind bombs that you would expect from any calm,
collected, seasoned veteran. I made eye contact with Falkor as I was walking by
the stands, and he made eye contact with me, and that was it. Not even a smile
or anything, just eye contact. I made a smile and a raise of the eyebrows,
which was not returned, so I guess that is the level of our interaction now. I
will surely make comment of it if we ever to stop to talk to eachother on the
field, but unless that happens I'll just let it be for now. I liked him, but I
think he very much looks down on me and has become a bit of a douche now
because of his acheivments in ulitmate, and that's cool with me. I don't
particularly care. Besides that, I ran across Jack who was coming back from Two
Finger, which I didn't realize was this weekend, so we crossed paths as he was
coming in and I was leaving, and shared a pleasent exchange, so that was the
only real redeeming quality of the game yesterday. So enough of that.

So I want to talk about my productivity now. There are two primary projects
which, when I have them under control, will I feel go long ways to increseing
my productivity, and both of those projects are my workout logger, and my
literary analyzer, and on both of them I am just a little bit stuck as to what
I want to do with them. The lit analyzer I have tried to work on a few times,
but I have always gotten stuck at this one aspect of it, and that aspect is the
concept of how exactly do I want to expose the structure of a work? Everytime I
think I find the best way to do something, I think of a better way to do it,
but then when I think about doing it that way, I find reasons why my first way
was better, and I am sort of stuck in this loop of "well how the fuck do you
want to represent literature anyway you asshole?" One consistent piece that has
remained constant throughout, and a piece that I want to keep, is that of
organizing the entire thing into a tree like structure. However, I always run
in to opposing ideas of how to parse the whole of the work into said structure.
What I am doing at this point, is I am putting the authors imposed structure,
being the chapter, and book and section deliniations, all as implicitly part of
the tree (and indeed, this has to be done in order to break the source material
into smaller files, otherwise the entire thing would be too difficult to
manipulate in Vim without becoming annoyed at the unweildiness of the file, so
there are practical reasons for this), but I have noticed sections where
chapters will come to a sort of cliffhanger and the cliffhanger will be
resolved at a later point in the story, even across chapters (Clancy or Dan
Brown or other writers would have this problem for sure), so while the concept
of dividing up my files into chapters for ease of reading is one I want to
keep, when it comes to analyzing the whole of the work, it doesn't make as much
sense to me to keep the author's impossed structure.

So lets go back to a Clancy novel, and use that as a framework for how I want
to analyze this. Let's reduce a novel down into it's simplest forms. A Clancy
novel will generally have multiple threads running through the thing. So in the
prologue, Clancy will kick of his threads, usually three or four of them, and
in doing will then set the stage for the different, at first disconnected
stories that end up coming into eachother. I've had this sort of idea last
night, that each thread would be it's own independent thing, and that it will
contain a list of events that are a part of the thread, but already I run in to
the problem what the best way to represent all of this would be. Take the Lord
of the Rings for instance. I could have Frodo's thread be sepearte from Sam's
thread, even though for the most part they are always together, they do
seperate for part of the novel, and they have different concerns and such
throughout the novel. But this is the problem I run into (and this is perhaps
the questions that I have been asking myself in my head but not making
explicit), is when Sam and Frodo are having dialogue together, what parts of
the dialog go into Sam's thread and which parts of the dialog go in to Frodo's
thread? One method of resolving this would be to say "any time Frodo is
talking, it goes in to Frodo's thread, and any time Sam is talking it goes into
Sam's thread," but I don't like this idea for the reason that, if the whole of
the thread is something like "Sam and Frodo travel through Mordor towards Mount
Doom where they plan to destroy the ring" then the dialog between Sam and Frodo
would all go through that thread, but when Sam and Frodo seperate, it would
have be to be different threads. And that is the problem, is I don't know how
broad I want these threads to be. I have this concept of being able to split at
thread into to, so a thread might have all of the dialog between Sam and Frodo,
and then when Sam is seperated from Frodo, that would create a split in the
thread, and when they are reunited, the thread comes back together, and there
is that way of representing it, so in that way a thread would be something that
has a list of primary actors, and a thread is something approaching more of an
event than an overaching thread. Indeed, in this way, one thread might contain
the events of the fellowship from Loth Lorien to Emyn Muil, and then that
thread would end there, and the we'd have new threads for Merry and Pippen,
Aragorn Gimli and Legolas, and Frodo and Sam, and then the Merry and Pippen
thread would combine with the Aragorn and Gimli and Legolas thread when they
meet back up, which would be a new thread there, and so on, and one can imagine
how this would go. What I don't like about this is, suppose I wanted to
extract Frodo's journey to Mordor out of these threads, I would simply find all
of the threads that contain Frodo, and say that that is Frodo's thread, but
then that thread would contain all of the dialog of the fellowship between say
Aragorn and Boromir, and while Frodo is there for that dialog, he is not a part
of it in any way, so again I am at a loss as to the best way to do this, and I
go back and forth as to how this should be represented.

So at this point I think it is important to take a step back and reconsider my
purpose in these threads in the first place. The whole purpose of this idea of
threads is to bring myself to be able to rewrite the whole of the novel in a
different order, or just extract the excerpts that have certain symbolism, or
certain other ideas. So in this way, the concept of annotations is a much more
useful one. However, then I run in to a different problem, and that is the
difference between a reference an actor in an event. So suppose I want to
extract every excerpt regarding Sauron. There are so many references to Sauron
throughout the LOTR, but he takes part in very few events. Pippen sees him in
the Palantir, as does Aragorn, but besides that he is only referenced by the
characters more than anything. Sauron is not the best example though, lets take
Gandalf. What I am getting at, if I want to find the path of Gandalf through
the Lord of the Rings, should that include the references to him? For instance,
I know surely (okay, not surely, but I'm pretty sure) that Frodo at least
thinks about him as he and Sam and Gollum travel there way to Mount Doom, but
the event "Frodo ties the elven rope around Gollum and it burns him" should not
contain Gandalf in it even if Frodo does make a mention to him. Gandalf is
being refernced, but that event would not be included in the path that Gandalf
takes through the lord of the Rings. However, Gandalf should definitely be
included as an annotation in that scene, and this is where my problem lies.
Indeed, perhaps this concept of thread is one of those concepts that nears the
mark, but needs to be re-imagined in a different way, similar to how clever
mathmeticians just simply have to think about a problem very hard in order to
solve it.

So I think at this point I have three concepts which encapsulate everything I
want to capture in my system. The first, and most specific, is that of the
speaker, which would be the lowest most base form of an excerpt. The second is
the idea of an event, which would be composed of multiple of these speakers,
and would have multiple actors. So the event, "Gandalf tells the council about
the betrayal of Saruman" would be an event, but "Saruman's betrayal" would not
be, since we never have dialog which tells about the betrayal of Saruman in
real time, only Gandalf's recollection of it. I'm not sure if Saruman would be
considered an actor in that event or not, I haven't decided yet. The last is
the concept of character reference, and I think the best way to reconcile this
would be to have a list of tags that the system looks for for a character. This
could be done in the form of [brackets] like this one. So in Harry Potter,
everytime "He who must not be named" is mentioned, I could put [Voldemort] in
brackets next to the name. It would be implied that the brackets are added by
me. To find all of these references, the use of regular expressions would be
used to scrape the raw data, and one could imagine a function that takes in the
regular expression input and returns every reference in the source (as the base
level of source), or returns every event that Voldemort is mentioned in, and
also every event that Voldemort is an actor in.

So every event would have a list of actors (and these actors need not even have
dialog, it could just be known that they were there) but every source has one
speaker. I'm not sure how unweildy this would get, trying to mark out every
time the speaker changes in my work, but it could be done. The events are what
are imposed into a tree like structure, and I find it neccesary to require that
leaves of events could be applied in non-sequential order. That is, I could
have an event like, "the gang discuss their plans" and "the villian creeps
closer to the gangs hideout", and in the case that the author wants to create
suspense by writting about the villian creeping closer to the hideout
interwoven in the dialog about the gang discuss their plans, I could still by
forcing some sub events be a part of the first parent event, and some sub
events being a part of the second parent event.

When it comes to thinking about these things, I think I have to take a top-down
(breadth first) approach to these events. So a first level event would be
something that spans the entire novel (Frodo's journey through middle earth vs
Aragorn's ascension to kingship), and each of these events would have their sub
events. This is the part where I am still having the hardest time imagining
what this is like in my head, as both of those bigger events would contain
overlaping sub-events, which is a concept I have not been able to capture in my
annotations and notes so far, so I'm still struggling with finding the best way
to represent this.

So after taking a bit of a walk on this, while I still haven't totally
reconciled how this will go in full, I have gotten quite a bit closer. I like
the idea of using brackets (which, when I acheive a certain level of
cleverness, I will be able to generate using vim scripts and autocompletion to
allow for easy night time reading) to represent speakers. Every source will
have a speaker. An event will be a list of sources. (Also note that I have the
freedom to break up one source by the same speaker as I see fit. This will
become helpful when someone goes on at length about something, and at the very
end of their monologue, they ask a question which fits in an entirely different
event. So I could annotate with brackets something like [speaker:Aloysha] for
his monologue, and then break up his monologue with [speaker:Aloysha] again
when the tone of his conversation changes as I deem appropiate). Once I have
these events, I then think that the best course of action will be to have a way
to combine events to this tree structure. I also want to have the notion that
one source can go into multiple events, and also the notion that one event can
go into multiple parent events as well.

With this concept well formed in my head, I think it will be best if I continue
to read Mistborn and break down that story in this way. That story is
complicated enough to warrent this sort of analysis but not so complicated that
I will get confused as to what I am doing and why.


