# 20181005
I had three dreams last night.

The first dream took place in a dream house that reminds me something of the
Bressens house. In it, there was a party going on. I think it was a Birthday
Party for some unidentified old man in my family. I'm not sure of the old man,
who it was. It could have been Glenn, but I don't really know. I know Glenn and
Papa were both in the dream.

In the dream, most of what I remember is walking around, and people were
offerering me drinks, and I turned them down. They weren't rude about it or
anything, but after I turned them down enough, they stopped asking. I remember
at some point, after I turned Jason down, and went outside, and came back
inside, Jason said, "I have to insist that you have a drink with me." and I
thought, "One beer, before the weekend, probably won't show up on the
urinalysis." So I said sure, so he went back into the kitchen to get a beer,
but didn't come back. When I went to look for him, I asked my mom where he
went, and she said that he left. That was abotu the extent of the first dream.

The second dream, it was Kyle's brithday, and we had this idea. We were going
to take, all of our immediate extended family (mostly, Chuck and Michelle's
family) and hire some animals, and take all of him things, and go for a walk
with them. It represented some sort of pilgramage or something. So we did this
for his birthday. Then, as the year went on, we did it for Evan's birthday as
well (My birthday doesn't come up in the dream now that I think about it) and
when Kyle's birthday arrives again, he wants to do this ritual again. People
are disgruntled about it, like, didn't we just do this last year? but Kyle
really wants to do it. So as Kyle goes inside to gather all of his things to
load on these animals, one donkey, and another bull, we're all out there
kabitzing, me and Chuck and Papa, and Chuck mentions tounge in cheek how we
just did this last year, and we usually only do these sorts of traditions for a
year, but Kyle really wants to do it again, so we're doing it again. And
imagine how the animals feel.

Then the donkey talks, and says, "Yeah, imagine how I feel, you just put all of
your belongings on me, and walk around in a circle for no reason, it's totally
pointless and just puts suffering on me." Then the bull speaks up, and says,
"Yeah, well at least your load is constant, imagine my joy when some
non-brithday kid gets tired and wants to put all of his things on me. I act as
a sort of cup holder for these assholes, and I have no idea how much I am going
to be holding for the trip." That was the extent of that dream.

The final dream, which occured after I had already woken up, but was
apprehnsive to actually get up, happened as I was trying with much force to try
and remember the dreams so that I could write them down. There was a woman and
a man, and I remember trying to discuss them about the dreams, trying to tell
them about the dreams, and I could get the second one pretty good, but I think
the first one might be lost forever. Suddenly, I remember talking with Jason,
(and now that I think about it, there was more to the dream, about actually
driving up to the party, with Jason and Mom and Dad, but that part is very
fuzzy to me, that might be where I tell them that I'm not going to be allowed
to drink), but regardless, I remember the first dream, or at least, enough of
it to get it down, and then the duo starts singing. I remember thinking that
this was a reenactment of the first dream, so I kept dreaming, thinking I would
see it all again. But then the lady goes up onto a stage and starts singing.
It's the kind of singing where people snap to the beat, very jazzy and upbeat
and such. She is wearing a modest red dress.

I wish I were better at music. I can hum right now the tune that she hummed,
but I don't know what notes they are. If I had a piano, I could figure it out,
but I don't, so I don't know.
