# 20180918
So it's been a while since I wrote in here.

Last night I had a rather interesting dream. There is a lot going on in this
dream, and I don't know what to make of it. I don't know what to make of a lot
of dreams.

So I don't precisely remember where this dream started, but I will just start
where I remember it starting. I know there is a lot more to this dream then I
am remembering, but I will just write out what I remember.

So the earliest in the dream I remember is, it is the Alliant customer
conference, and we are all in a room.

So I honestly don't remember exactly the "event" that this dream revolves
around. In fact, it sort of comes up later that I'm not really able to describe
what is happening. But regardless, I do remember the scene. It was in a large
hotel room, like a hotel ballroom, and in the center there was a pillar, where
there may have been a bar. I don't remember exactly. So I remember, there was a
point, with everyone there, that something was going to go down. Again, I don't
remember what, but whatever it was, it brought Alliant into two camps, those
being loyal to Alliant and those rebelling against Alliant. So I fell in to the
"rebel camp" for two reasons I remember in the dream. The first is quite
obvious, and that is because I was on the rebel side anyway. The second,
though, was because I thought that it would be so clear that everyone would be
on the rebel side, that I would be on the majority side as well, and all of
Alliant would be on this side with me.

Well, there were only eight of us that rebeled. I know that that is the number
exactly, but I don't remember which eight. In fact, due to the circumstances,
we ended up spliting up quite a bit. Kyle might have been involved in this part
of the dream, but I don't remember. Anyway, in the commotion, we had made our
way to the left side of the ballroom. It wasn't exactly riotous this behavior
or rebellion, it was more, "we are part of this movement" sort of thing. It was
an idealogical thing, more so than it was a physical thing.

So regardless, I remember being towards the left side of this room, and having
now determined that the other people of Alliant were not on this side and that
they were determined to stop us, I began to look for a way to get out of there.
I was hidden in the crowd, and there were Alliant people patroling the crowd,
trying to find me, or us rather, but we are all split up, so they are trying to
find each of us.

So I knew that staying in the crowd was going to be a losing play, so I
observed carefully the people that were patroling. Chris Konkol, Ruel, and
James, were three that I know were patrolling, and Grace was standing back in
the Alliant crowd very much on that side of the idealogue as well.

So I watched them patroling, and within the crowd, I was able to sneak out
without them seeing me. But I think they may have saw me exit, because I
remember feeling very much like I had gotten out of that situation, but I still
needed to find a place to run and hide to.

So outside of teh ballroom, the hotel was very open and large for three floors.
THere were a lot of big open rooms, with balconies, and open staircases, and
all sorts of stuff. It was almost like an MCEscher work, except not with shit
going upside down, just with lots of staircases and hallways and such for these
three floors.

Something else also relevent, the carpets were all bright red, with intricate
patterns on them, and there were hand ways and such that were made out of nice
wood, and the whole thing was what you would imagine the inside of "The Ritz"
to look like.

So on the outside of this ballroom, I run around, trying to lose anyone that
might have seen me, and I make my way to the third floor, near the middle/back
of the hotel itself, and I decide to just get into elevator that is there, and
go up.

So I get in, and go up, and as I am going up, this hotel has 13 floors, but as
I am on about the sixth floor, I realize that you need a keycard in order to
get out on any of the floors. Since I don't have one, I know that I am doomed
to go up, and to exit back on the third floor where everyone is looking for me.

So I exit back on the third floor after a bit, and I see that James and Ruel
are there patroling very near the elevator. As the elevator opens, I decide
that it is most unwise to get out of the elevator at that moment, so I decide
to just tell it to go back up and down and see if the coast in more clear when
I get back.

However, James sees the elevator open, and sees me in it, and says, "Gotcha."
He first trys to convince me to get out, but then, when that doesn't work, as
the elevator doors are closing, he gets in the elevator with me.

With him in the elevator, I basically pull guard on him straight into triangle.
I lock up the triangle. He is struggling, like someone inexperienced with such
things might, but I pull his right arm and make the proper adjustment with the
angles, and lock up the triange good, and begin to squeeze. There is a moment
where his face turns red, and I see it, and I make sure that my triangle is
tight around his neck. He convulses impulsively a couple of times, trying to
get air that he can't get, and then goes unconscious.

I'm not aware at the very start that he has gone unconcious, but I quickly
realize that this is how the body does this.

So I let go of the triangle, mount him, and look into his face from the top as
he comes back into consciouness.

I then said, as he comes back into consciousness, "So do you really think it's
right to catch me." He is bewildered, and confused, but very calm, and says
"no" just as he comes back. And so then I said, "You're still going to turn me
in, aren't you?" and then, as he starts gaining consciousness again, he says,
"yeah." I say, "All right, that's fine" and let him stand.

The elevator comes back down to the third floor, and we both get out, and he
turns me in.

We go back to the big ballroom area, and all eight of us now have been
corraled, and we are awaiting trial.

For whatever reason, they are having us go up in twos to be judged. I am the
last group of four to go, and with me is a small child, maybe 12 years of age,
and she is to go with me and be judged.

As we are waiting, I know my mom enters the scene. I don't remember exactly her
role. I do remember her saying, "Here is your pen, I figured you would want
it," and she handed me my pen. However, it wasn't the pen that I usually keep
with me, the F-402, instead it was the pen that I keep at my desk, the F-701,
that I just bought a week ago. And I said, "Wait, this isn't the right pen,
the pen that I usually keep with me is still lost."

I am just thinking back now, and I actually know that I did lose this pen at
the customer conference last year irl. It's gone forever. So that's an
interesting tidbit.

I then remember discussing how I was going to make my case. I was going to say
something like "I know my first amendment rights were violated, along with the
fourth amendment rights, and I think the eleventh. I don't know what those
amendments are, or if they are even the amendments that I am thinking about,
but it has to do with the right to not follow a group of people if you don't
want to. And I know that somehow my amendment rights were being violated by
this event." And that was going to be my defense.

So when it's time for us to go on trial, we go up to the stand, and behind the
stand is a lady judge, and she first asks the girl to make her defense. The
girl raises her phone and says, "With this, I have taken the temperature of
some of the people, and their temperature goes as high as 123 degrees Celsious,
when the maximum legal temperature for a human to go is 100 degrees celcious. I
acted according to this information."

When she said this, the person behind the judge said, "Oh shit." and
immediately started talking back into her mic/recorder/device thing, trying to
verify this, because if it was true, it would be very bad for their case.

After the girl made her defense, I thought to myself, "Damn, her defense is so
much better than mine, all I have is this sort of idealogical rambling and she
actually has something defensable." Again, the theme of inadequecy comes up
agin.

Well, the judge calls me to the stand now, and asks me to make my defense, and
I say the same thing I said above, about some of my rights being violated in
some way or another, and I wasn't sure which ones it was, but I know some of
them were violated, and so that's why I acted in the way I did." And when the
judge took this she said, "Mhm" like, "Oh is that all," and then had me go
behind her to the lobby area.

At this point I know Michelle showed up, and she started talking about some of
the technicalities of some of the amendments that might have been violated, but
went into why specifically they weren't explicitly being violated, and gave me
a bit of lip about how weak my defense was.

So back in the lobby area, we were being corraled, and we were told to find our
sleeping partners (at the customer conference, Alliant assigned us one room for
two people, so we had our partner) and to go to our rooms to sleep. I remember
saying "I really don't want to sleep in the hotel, I am going to go back to my
apartment and sleep." and I remember either my mom, who was there again, or
Michelle, who told me to just make sure that my sleeping partner knew what was
up.

So I figured out that my sleeping partner was Joe, the Joe that I played board
games with that one time, I forget his last name at the moment, but he plays
for the Roughnecks. I went to the front lobby, and looked for him, and told him
that I was going to go back to my apartment for the night and sleep there.

He was unconcerned, and essentially just said, "Yeah, sure, whatever."

So I asked my mom where my car was, and she said, "slot 246" I believe. So I
went outside to the parking lot, and looked at all teh spots, but they were all
in the 100's. So I went to the next spot over, where all the busses and trains
were, and spot 246 was a bus stop. I then thought, "Oh, so she just meant I
should take the train back to my apartment." I wasn't excited to do that, but I
figured it would be okay, so I waited to get on the bus.

So I got on teh bus, and the way this bus worked, it would drive up next to the
train that you should get on as it is moving, and it would drive the exact
speed, and it you would have to jump between the two moving vehicles in order
to get on. At the point that I realized this was happening, I thought, "Oh,
this makes sense, the trains wouldn't all fit on the small little platform that
the buses were on, so they have to spread them out by doing it this way.

I think that was the extent of the dream.

Card 1: I see two angels, interwoven between eachother
Card 2: I see two monkeys placing palms hand to hand. Their faces are projected
up in the red, and they can speak to eachother in that way.
Card 3: Two female four legged creatures are posing up to eachother. The red
behind them could perhaps be a pendulum ready to hit them towards eachother.
Card 4: I see a dragon, from the top down, flying towards the south end of the
paper.
Card 5: It's a bat. Not much more to say about it.
Card 6. When turned sideways, it's a duck that is flying along the surface of
the water, leaving a trail of water coming up behind it.
Card 7: I don't see much in this one. The negative space is almost as much as
the positive space. The top blots could be two heads arguing with eachother,
but that's a little far fetched and doesn't explain the bottom
Card 8: I see two lizards climbing up the side of a mountain on each side, with
the skull of some kind of great lizard on the top that they are trying to get
over.
Card 9: Two praying mantises are emerging from the smoke, and are probing
eachother for entries to pounce.
Card 10: Two shrimps are swimming nothrward toward a common goal, with seaweed
and algea all around them.
