# 20180629 Dreams: Psilocibin, Colorado trip ski lift, Kim in Seattle - Convesation with my mom
Okay, so I had another dream today that I want to share briefly. I did not
intend for this to become a dream journal, but as long as I am having vivid and
memorable dreams that can be interpreted easily, I will continue to write about
them, and if nothing else it gives me a topic to get into the flow of writing
as I start each entry. At this moment, I haven't ever come to a point where I
feel like I have nothing to say, but I am only three articles in at this point
and who knows when I have been doing this for a few weeks I might become
exhausted of this exercise and feel as though it becomes wearisome, or
repetitive, or some other such feeling, and I don't want that, and writing
about dreams I think will help not only for me to have more memorable dreams
(because I really do love waking up and thinking about a dream) but also it
will help in sparking ideas to write about here.

So without further ado, this particular dream was a three parter. I don't
recall much about the first part, except that it invovlved Isiah from BJJ, who
I have not actually interacted much with as of late, but is a pretty cool guy,
and I end up eating Psilocibin Mushrooms with him in the dream. He shows me a
stash, and I take some of it and I eat them, and there is a particularly large
cap that he says I should only eat if I'm feeling very adventurous, and I end
up eating it.  I don't remember much of the dream beyond those details. The
mushrooms were in a room which was like Grant's room in Denton, but that
location has not come up before in my dreams, so it seems a bit minor of a
detail.

The second part of the dream involved me going to Colorado. I was with someone,
I forget who, but in this instance of going to Colorado, it was Peter and
Madison, and me and I'm pretty sure this someone was a girl, and instead of
driving there, we decided to take the ski lifts there. Obviously that's absurd,
but in the dream there was a network of ski lift like infrastructure for
trasportation, and Peter and Madison were in the seat in front of us, and me
and this girl (who I didn't interact with much, and I even forget if she was a
girl or not) were together in the seat behind them. The most striking thing
about this dream was a couple things. Most of the dream was about dialog
between Peter and I as he turned back and we discussed things, although the
actual dialog, and even what the dialog was regarding escapes me at this time.
The two notable things were this. One, I remember a moment, when we are going
over one of the poles that holds up the ski lift, where Peter and Madison after
they went over it turn back and inform us to be careful of that pole, and I
remember thinking that it can't be too bad, but when we go over it, we bounce
quite violently, and I had to hold myself in the dream to keep from falling out
of the lift. The second thing I remember is, shortly after this bump (the ride
was mostly smooth besides that one massive bump) we decide to stop at one of
the stops (because this ski lift like apparatus had stops along the way) and
visit another place before reaching our destination. This place is another
dream location that is extremely memorable for me, and I know I've written
about before, but this section of the dream ended before we explored it again.
It is difficult for me to recall the dream where this location was in the past,
but the location can best be described as a deserty area with lots of mountains
that have flat tops that come up and create canyon like valleys between them,
and the entire desert area is a pilgramage type thing with the start of the
pilgramage being a water place with lots of grassy mounds that create a lot of
paths, where lots of people go to recreate in, followed by this plilgramage
desert thing, and followed by an indoor hallway that goes to a snowy place. I
don't want to spend too much time describeing this whole thing because that is
another dream, and the only detail is that we decided to stop at the first area
just to check it out before getting back on the lift.  However, we merely
decided that, and this portion of the dream ended before we even really got off
the lift. I don't have memory of getting off the lift, only that we intended to
do so.

The final part of the dream is the most beautiful, and as I was waking up I
only wanted to go back to sleep to experience more of this dream. What made
this section of the dream beautiful was not anything that happened in the
dream, but the beauty of the locale. In this section of the dream, I was
returning to Seattle, the dream version of Seattle that I have had before, and
in this dream version of Seattle, as I was driving up, there is a point you hit
where you get there, and the whole thing is like one path that goes around this
great mound, and from the top of this section of the path, you can see the path
going off to the left, and a whole grassy area that is the mound that doesn't
have any path on it, but instead is just a great grass that goes down almost
like a ski slope with trees on each side and everything, and from the top here
you can see the beautiful water off in the distance, the water of Seattle that
is a bit like the lake that you see from Lakeview drive when I first got to
Seattle with all the boats and everything out there, but the dream version
where it's even more open, more diverse and so much more expansive and
wonderful. So this section of the dream was mostly me driving my way to this
hill top place, and me observing the humble sights, those sights which are also
breathtaking in the dream but that I can't recall in their details, as I
thought about my destination. I remember thinking about the destination as I
was driving there, and in this dream I was also on my way to meet Kim, the girl
I dated twice in college, as in a went on two seperate dates with her. The
reason Kim comes up I think is two reasons. The first and less artistic reason
is because I seem to recall seeing pictures of her on facebook at one point
visiting Seattle. I could be wrong on that point but I remember seeing it and
memory is the only important thing in dreams. The second is that, while I was
in seattle, and I was smoking all the weed and getting unreasonably high all
the time, I remember having a sketch notebook that was an absurd size,
something like 11x14, and I had this idea of using flower and star patterns to
create a scene I would call "Kim and Brett on the Rooftop" which would portray
in a sense the scene of her and I sitting on the roof of building at UTD, where
we sat after our second "date", and we just sat there for 10 minutes, and as we
sat there I thought about her, and about our dates, and I just decided that it
wasn't really flying. I thought about how I could have gone in to make a move,
to try and kiss her or something, but it felt wrong, like it was disingenuous,
and that I would simply be doing it to keep up with the social norms of what
that date and what that moment would have been like in a movie. This was a
beautiful moment for me, because though my kiss with Maddie months before had
been very bold "pink" in my memory of what that was like, this was instead the
most beautiful "gray" memory I can have. It was resolve, it was knowing that
Kim and I just weren't sparking, and I saw the beauty of that in that moment,
and it's more beautiful than grey. This happened I think my senior year, before
Scarlett, and Seattle was obviously after Scarlett, and I had wanted to capture
this moment in art somehow, but even in Seattle I wasn't able to find the
inspiration to make that piece, and I probably never will. Maybe I will at some
point, but I would have to go back to Seattle and smoke a lot of weed and go to
a particular park and find a spot on a bench that I have very clearly in my
mind, the same park where Sockeye tryouts were (and I only mention those
tryouts as an identifier and not because I want to associate this with those
tryouts in any way) and I would have to sit there with the very same sketchbook
with a pencil and make it appear, as if something else were guiding my hand.
That may happen in my life time, but maybe not, we will see. Anyway, that huge
tangent I went on merely to say, in this dream, I was driving to meet her
there, and I remember thinking about the junction of this top of the hill in
the dream world and the lake water view from there. And when I arrived there, I
remember stopping the car to park, because the rest would be a walk down to the
part of that section in the dream world that is at the bottom of the hill where
there is a VIP club that I am welcome to (and I am welcome there just because
it's my dream world and it would be weird if I weren't, I suppose I could be
rejected but that is not this club), and I was planning to walk down and meet
Kim at the entrance to that club so we could go down to the water and go on a
long walk together and reunite after a long time. I want to be clear that I
have no intention of reuniting with the real Kim, we truly were incompatible
chemistry wise when we dated, but this dream version of her represents a sort
of non-sexual uniting of two souls that miss eachother and want to see
eachother. She represents something inside of me, especially in this dream and
not in my active conscious mind. And so I remember in this dream, I made it to
this ridge, and I stopped and got out of my car, and stood there and was taken
away by the view. I was not taken away in the sense that I lost my senses or my
capabilities, but instead I simply looked out and took in it's beauty, a beauty
which I knew was there but always manages to take you everytime you take it
even though you know what you're about to see, and I acknowledged this feeling
of admiration, serene beauty, and I accepted it and turned toward the path to
see something I didn't expect. What I had expected was to go along this path on
my own, and to meet Kim at the bottom like I said, but instead when I turned to
the path, I saw her there, eager to meet me, a bit in the distance but not so
far that I was entirely sure that it was her and I could examine what she was
wearing, perhaps 100 meters in dream distance, and I saw she was wearing a
rather intricate swimsuit, the kind of swimsuit which would accentuate all of
her best feminine features, but at the same time modest, something she herself
might call cute, but I could only call the perfect swimsuit for her body at
that time as I saw, as if she gave thought to who I was and what I would like
to see her wear. And all of this I must remind you was all taken very
non-sexually, as if we were more acquainted than we actually are in real life
and we had shared intimate things before, as if our dating experienced turned
not into a relationship that would have a definite "break-up" point, but as if
our relationship would have turned from a couple dates of two people that don't
spark to a sort of comfort in sharing things with eachother that we would come
to eachother to discuss things and meet for food occasionally to talk about
mundane things like how our new job was going or how our life endeavors were
treating us, and through this relationship we hadn't met in a long time since
life had taken us different directions, but now life brought us back into the
same direction again and we were meeting again and we both had accepted and
were glad in the sort of relationship that we had had as two human beings, and
I saw her there, and with that feeling I saw her and was wholly surprised,
because I did not expect to see her at this juncture and expected to meet her
further down, but she had walked up to meet me and had been waiting for not too
long, because she was expecting me and knew when I would arrive, and when I saw
her I was taken by surprise and then a feeling of warmth that can only be
described in the context of this terrible run-on sentance which I should be
punished for writing. I saw her there, her beauty coming out through the
swimsuit she was wearing, and she smiled upon seeing me, and I smiled as well,
and we came towards eachother and we shared a hug. We embraced breifly, me
feeling her body and her swimsuit against my clothed self and noting the
juxtaposition of those two feelings, swimsuit and clothes, and the embrace was
breif but when it ended we stil held hands I told her that I wasn't expecting
to see her here, and that she didn't have to climb all the way up here, and she
replied that she knew that, but wanted to surprise me, to which I replied that
she looked beautiful, and that the backdrop of the water only made her more
beautiful, and then I took her hand and we both looked out to the water and
took in it's beauty together, both admiring it, but at the same time both
maintaining our facilities, our wits so to speak, not letting the beauty
control our emotions but instead letting the beauty become a part of our
emotions, and I looked out upon it, upon that scene, and everything felt right
with the world. And at that moment, we turned back to eachother, made eye
contact, and without even talking to eachother we both knew that I was to take
her hand and lead her down to the lake where there was water and we would walk
and talk and share eachother at that gorgeous scene.

It was at this point that I woke up. I will remark that I know last night I
slept naked, and I do not recall having any morning wood when I woke, and I
usually make some note of morning wood, especially now that I have abstained
from masturbation. I make this point only to say that there was no sexual
interest or motivation for this dream, and that the beauty of it was not the
sort of sensual and sexual beauty that we as mammals of the homo sapien race
only so much like to indulge in, but instead the beauty is the kind of beauty
that makes you feel utter awe, not even like you're lucky to be alive and
witness it, but just that it takes you away, not taking away your senses or
reasonableness, but instead the sort of beauty that fills you with awe and
becomes just another part of the whole beautiful stirring pot that is our
emotions.

When I woke, all I wanted to do was go back to sleep to experience more of the
dream again, but alas, that was not to be, as I had to make my way to training.

Speaking of, I have had so far a great day as far as training is concerned.
Paco taught a lot of standup things that I like a lot, and we had a very good
morning session. Also, today I had some very good rolls with people at no-gi
open mat, one with the little short hispanic dude who I am friends with on
facebook but I forget what his preferred name of reference is. David is my
guess, as that is his middle name on facebook, and his first name is something
like Fredricco or something, but yeah.

I think I have decided to forego registering for the Five grappling tourney.
This is something I have been struggling with lately, and I don't know if it is
connected, but I had a lot of anxiety for Dallas open, and I am getting a lot
of anxity for this tournament, and I can't help but think that I have created
an association with my loss in Denver to my subsequent drive home and visit in
jail only fifteen hours later, and that association is acting as a strong
catalyst for my tournament anxiety. Obviously I have gotten tournament anxiety
in the past, but this is on a new level. And I hate that I am feeling this
anxiety, but I think it is wise to respect it, and take a break from the
tournament scene. As much as it pains me, I really don't want to sign up for a
tournament and lose, as I already have excuses for my losing and I see that as
the expected outcome. Indeed, I am a new blue belt, and I know there are a lot
of killer blue belts out there, and I know this is something that everyone
struggles with, but there is something more. It's not that I expect to lose,
but it is more that I think I associate now the feeling of lose with my
experience in jail, which is a horrible thing to associate. The thing is, I
don't know if it would be wise to compete anyway to overcome that anxiety, or
instead to just wait it out until the weight of that felony charge is entirely
off my shoulders. As much as I don't want the latter to be the case, and as
silly and stupid as that sounds, either win or lose I don't expect to gain much
from competing. Rather, I think what I should do is go to more open mats, and
expose myself to more training partners, so that rather that discovering myself
and my Jiu-Jitsu through competition, discover it more organically and more
playfully through increased exposure. I am sure that I will compete again, and
I will certainly still be a blue belt when this felony charge gets resolved, so
I feel most confident in waiting this out. I'm am still mentally conflicted,
but in my heart this makes the most sense to me.

I almost forgot what I really wanted to journal about today. That thing was the
interaction with my mom yesterday. So yesterday, or the day before, I forget, I
wrote about how I have this feeling, similar to the feeling of Aloysha with
Father Zossima in Brothers Karamazov, where I have this need to stay with my
father in this time. So Thursday, I called my mom after work, but before yoga,
at around 5:30 in the afternoon, and when I called her and she answered I could
tell immediately that I woke her. Her voice was distant and vague, and I quite
honestly think I have never heard that voice before. It reminded me of the
voice of Ciara when she would wake. I like that voice, but upon hearing it I
knew I woke her. The conversation started like that. I called, and she answered
after about three or four rings, and she said "hello" in a very delierious
voice. I replied in a bit more of an enthusastic voice and I said hey, and let
there be a silence for a bit. After that silence, I then continued on with
the start of the conversation, which we had talked about having before, saying
that I was calling just to catch up on how things were going and to see if it
would be okay to visit. What followed was about six to eight or so minutes of
her describing to me my fathers condition, how he has been having diareahha and
fevers and is running a 104.5 temperature, and she mentioned a lot of things
about blood counts and transfusions and lots of other things that the doctors
have been doing to keep it under control. I stood there, in the stairwell of my
workplace just listening to her talk, mostly just taking it in and not
responding at all in any way, and instead just letting her talk and tell me
the things that she wanted to tell me. She also mentioned how she can't even
bring in water and other things into the room because his immune system is so
compromised and such that they can't risk anything to infect him, and she went
on like this like I said for over six minutes. Towards the end I started
contibuting with things such as "yeah" or "hmm" or "right" but I still just
stood there, pacing, and listening. And this sort of thing is what I knew he
would be going through, but hearing it from my mother made it more real in a
sense. I knew it would be rough, but I wasn't sure in what way it would be
rough, so it was interesting to here her talk to me about my fathers condition.
And listening to her, I got the very distinct impression that she very much
didn't want me to come, and I say this for this reason. So many times,
especially, and I have memories of this as a child, coming back from Houston
after visiting family, my mother and father would discuss events and
conversations of the previous week or weekend or whatever, and they would talk
about different people in the extended family, and their discussion would
always be in a sort of "negative but benefit of the doubt" tone. Saying things
like "and did you see what she was wearing" or "yeah, she stayed fixated on
that topic of conversation for so long" and other things about the things
people said, and the things people wore, and how someone acted in a certain way
in a certain setting. And not only that but they would always do so in a way so
as to speak poorly of the people which we had just had conversation with and
shared time with. And I paint this in perhaps too negative of a light, because
I know surely they also talked about good things too, like relatives of
relatives getting a new job or talking about how some new significant other was
good for someone, and things such as that, but in my memory, I remember this
sharply, because I would always reflect on their conversation and tone as I
eavsdropped their words from the back of the car, and I would contrast that to
the conversation and tone that they had during the events and during the
gatherings, and they were so remarkably different that it rose in me a feeling
of disgust. And the disgust was at the sheer two-facedness of it all, because
though I did enjoy our gatherings to an extent, I was generally speaking very
much against them as a child, not only becasue they were always sandwiched
between a long drive from home to Houston and back, but also because I took
very little interest in the conversations of adults, and would have only my
handheld video games to ammuse myself during the whole time, and while I
enjoyed playing video games, I selfishly saw no reason to bring ourselves so
often to this entirely different city to play video games there, when I could
have just as easily stayed at home and played the console games that I
generally enjoyed more. Indeed, as a child I was quite bent on playing video
games in most of my free time, but I digress. My point is, the distaste for
these gatherings that I had in myself, I was always as open as I could be about
them, and would keep to myself in the corner with my games and make my
appearances as I was obligated to, and I would be cordial enough simply because
that was the path of least resistance, all the while my parents would continue
with the festivities and the nicities and all of the other obligations of
socail interactions with extended family, and they would give an air of
enjoying themselves that I thought could only be false as I listened to them
speak back on the whole experience in the car ride back. Of course, in more
adult eyes looking back, I see that one can still enjoy oneself and still
gossip ruefully about the people you enjoyed, but I rarely enjoyed myself in
anyway and saw this same distaste in their ride back. I mention all of this to
say, I know both sides to my parents, both the outward side that they show to
their family, and the inner side that they share with only eachother, but which
I as their child was able to overhear in that situation, and knowing both those
sides, I could sense something in this in the conversation with my mom
yesterday. Indeed, she was being entirely genuine with me as she explained for
her time my father's condition, and when she was done I started talking for a
bit about how I'm not sure where it comes from but lately I have had this
feeling that I need to visit more, but even as I was saying something so short
as that my mom would inturrupt me in my words to attend to the nurses that were
there caring for my father and to attend to her motherly duties that I know she
feels so strongly for in herself, and even as I said my words, I could get the
sense that she very much did not want me to visit. So after I was inturrupted
briefly in the middle of my short thought, I finished the thought, but instead
of going on to the next thought that I would have shared had I not gotten this
sense from her, I instead put the ball in her court, and gave her entierly the
option to tell me to just stay the fuck away. But, of course, since my mom is
too nice, she did not take that opportunity, and instead we went back and forth
a little bit about how my father's condition again as if to deter me. I then
said something to the effect of how I don't mind those things and still feel
strongly like you both need my support, but I did then go on to say that I'm
not sure if visiting is the right way to support, again giving her the
opportunity to tell me to stay the fuck away, but of course again she didn't
take and said how she wasn't sure either. So at this point I left the stairwell
and said something like, "well, how about I go to yoga and I'll text you when
I'm done and we can go from there" and even at that point she kept saying how
she would text me, but even in that I could sense that she wasn't sure what she
was meant to do, at which point I said something like, "No, don't even think
about me, I'll text you and if you don't reply I'll just assume your sleeping
or something and I won't bother you any further" and we left it at that before
we shared our conversation ending formalities and I moved on.

The entire conversation lasted something like nine minutes if I recall
correctly from what my phone read. Looking back the call started at 5:30 and
lasted 8 minutes total. And I remember when I finished, and I looked at my
phone, I was in a position where my office was to my right, and the parking
garage was on my left, and I could see 114 the road that would lead to the
hospital on the right and to yoga to the left. And I looked at all these things
and I was able to put together the map of everything in my head along with the
timeline of how things would go in the future, and again like I said about my
perspective on the tournament earlier in this entry, I knew in my heart what
the correct thing to do was but my mind and reasoning and logic hadn't
proccessed everything yet, and so I felt conflicted mentally but not
emotionally, but the mental conflict indeed does create a sort of emotional
one, but this confict was instead a sort of destruction of my emotions as I
forced myself to try and see this entire thing from a logical and zoomed out
perspective.

In that moment, the primary thought in my head was actually the same as
Aloysha's in the Brothers Karamazov, after he joined the hands of Ivan and
Katerina, of that of a righteous fool. Indeed, where did my feeling of being
with my father come from? And why only just now did it make sense for me to
support them in this time. My father was in no state to be presentable. I
thought back to my experience in the hospital, and I felt shame at my present
state more than anything. I didn't want people to see me in that state, I
wanted to find my inner peace, and endure my feelings of pain and also the
feelings of narcotic numbing on my own, without the sympathy of others. I was
in a pitiful state, and I did not want to receive pity, as receiving pity only
made me feel more pitiful, and I didn't want to feel more pitiful but less
pitiful, so I wanted all the people who meant well and cared for me and wanted
to be there for me to go away so that I could enjoy (indeed, enjoy is the word,
but not in its traditional sense) my suffering in peace, and on my own, so that
I could find my inner self and use that inner self to get through my time
there. And I have talked about this with my father, and though he has said
otherwise (indeed, my father is much more extraverted than I, who consider
myself having a rather extreme, if not maybe a little disengenuous, case of
introversion), I thought about my own feelings and emotions. Indeed, if my
feeling of being with my father is genuine, why is it just now eight months
after he has been diagnosed, that I feel the need to see him? I know in myself
what changed, but those changes are only recent, and quite honestly they don't
hold up to scrutiny. What a saintly fool I am!

Indeed, it would make sense to visit my father just to be with him in his
current state in the heat of battle, as his body attempts aggressively to
accept the stem cells donated by my brother Evan, if I had been there for him
in his other states, but I have not and have only visited sporadically and in
times of better health, in the times between his treatments of Chemo where he
is feeling higher energy and less beaten down. If I had visited in his lower
times there, if my feelings of being there for him and for my mom had been much
stronger like they are now before in the past eight months and I had seen him
in his pitiful and beaten states and helped him through those times, and I knew
that my support in those other moments were appreciated, and that it helped,
and that I provided something for him, if I had been there in those moments
with that effect, then surely I would have insisted that I visit in this moment
as well. But I didn't, and so why now, at the time when he is beaten down the
worst, after I had so many opportunities to give my visits and my support a
test drive, why now at the worst time should I give my support a try? I of
course have my best intentions in mind, but my past actions make it so I can't
follow through on these feelings I have, it doesn't make sense, because I would
I know that I would be doing more good than harm?

And this is where I go back to the conversation with my mother. In that moment,
looking left and right at all the things I would do in that moment, I hadn't
gone through those thoughts yet, but my emotions knew them, and my thoughts
eventually independently came to the same line as my heart as I made my way to
my car and drove out of the parking garage and made my way west to yoga. I
struggled through my thoughts, doing my best to become an observer of my
emotions but not letting them guide my thoughts, and the thoughts I just
described above are the thoughts I came to in that drive. And when I arrived at
yoga I knew that it was not right for me, in that moment, being unable to
change the past eight months of my actions, to visit my father that evening.
Instead, I knew it was right to send my mother a message indicating my
intentions at that moment, and to instead find another time to visit my
parents.

I also thought back to my visit that weekend, where my father told me that he
knew he was going to get through this. My mother and father have gotten through
this so far with the support and everything else that has guided them through
this battle, and they can continue to do what has worked. This has been eight
months for them supporting eachother through this, and at this sort of climax
of it, they can continue to do so. If I were a wishing man I would be wishing
that I could go back in time and change myself, tell myself to visit more
through the poor times as much as the good times, but I didn't do that already,
and it's foolish to wish for such things. Instead, I can try and give my
support in the best way I can.

So after I finished the Bikram yoga class, I messaged my mom and said this.

    So, after our convesation I thought about and think it would be wise to not
    visit tonight and let you both get rest. Have some of my strength as you
    both go through this today, and I'll keep up to date with caring bridge and
    messages. Much love.

To which my mom replied with

    Thank you for making the decision! I am not great at making those right
    now. Love you too!

That message did not come until two minutes later, and at that point I had
already put the phone in the shoe and gone to the Yin class which I had decided
last minute that I wanted to join. And I had a great Bikram class and a great
Yin class.

On a much lighter note, the speed dating event that I signed up for was
canceled tommorrow, and will happen instead like a full fucking month from now.
At first I was really dissappointed about that, but instead I thought about it
and that gives me an opportunity to go to the Roughnecks game tomorrow, which
will be fun. It's a blessing in disguise I think. I will plan on messaging my
mom tomorrow to see how my dad is doing, and to see if visiting is something
that will make sense at that point. If it is, I think the plan will be to go to
the 3 o clock bikram class tomorrow, and then the Roughnecks game after, which
means I'll have time either around noon or just after noon (or before noon) to
visit. Before noon actually probably makes the most sense, but I don't know
what the state of "eating food" will be for my dad but if it's okay than before
noon would be a good time so that he can socialize and eat, if he is in a state
where socializing and eating is going to be a thing that is even on his mind.
This time I will be more keen on the signals I get from my mom and see what to
do from there.


