# 201808009
So today I am not feeling so inspired to say anything really, but I am a bit
excited to continue writing my really bad rough draft for my Hermit story, so I
will probably keep it breif in this entry and go to that.

I do feel it is neccesary to give a breif update on the status of where my life
is right now. A couple days ago, I got an email from my mom, saying that it's
interesting the treatment they are getting in the rehab facility. My dad's
kidneys are very slowly recovering, and they are hoping to be able to take out
the dialysis port at some point. More relevent, I have not had the urge to
visit him in a while, and I still have thoughts of resentment towards both of
them. Especially after the whole debacle with the escort, I have been very
un-inclined to visit.

Things are going all right at work. Yesterday, we had a meeting to talk about
Alliant Online 2.0. The big takeaway is that we wanted to refine the design of
the whole thing. The big thing was that Nick wanted ideas for mock ups for the
UI. Which I don't know if I could give fewer shits about it. I probably could,
since there is a part of me that wants to show initiative, but I certainly
don't want to lead up on designing the frontend of a website. That sounds
awful. We should honestly hire a web developer, one with some experience in web
design, to do the whole thing. But we won't do that. It's not going to happen.

As far as my side project goes, I am quite happy with the way it is coming
along. At this point, it reads and parses files, and then writes to those same
files reflexively, so that means that I am beginning to get my freedom with
being able to actully do things with it. The next step is to get it to write a
tags file, which is actually easier then I think it will be I think, and at
that point I have what I would consider my "first alpha release" of the
product. I say this as if it's an actual product. The biggest thing that I know
I am going to have to fix up is the concept of user settings. As it is,
everything parses as it does. There is certainly some modulation that will need
to be done. Also, I'm not sure if I like my overuse of extension methods, I
think it's a little overdone. Let me rephrase, it is a lot overdone, and I
think I need to scale back on it. Maybe, maybe not, it's hard to say, but I use
extension methods pretty extensively.

The next step will be to come up with the use cases, and to wrap all of my
functions into the controller, so that I can then create the front end's for
it. The features I have now, I certainly want to make so that I can have a
console front end. In fact, I want to include a .vim file with my release, just
to make my vim integration be generated from the files. So that is on the
horizon for what needs to be done. It's exciting to see this thing start to
come to life. And surely, once I start using it, I will have a better idea of
what I want it to do and such, and I will get a better handle on my use cases
for the thing. It's really cool. I'm really excited to begin compiling some
literature.

So I lied, I decided I would come back to this today. I'm not sure why, but I
sort of feel like compiling a stream of consciousness for whatever reason. For
one reason or another, I feel like just writing a bunch of words into a
computer and letting them unfold before me.

Something that is dreadfully obvious about my story is that I have a lack of
romantic experience. It's actually quite astonishing. Like, really astonishing.
I really need to do something about it. I was listening to Jordan Peterson's
lectures on the bible earlier today, and I was watching his introduction to the
flood myth, and something sort of struck me about that myth that I think is
resonating with me. Something like, the flood myth is not tragic, because the
people know that there can be a flood. The people are wholly contempabile in
the eyes of god, so god sends the flood to destroy them. That is the direction
we usually think about the flood myth. But it actually goes the other way.
Because the people were not ready for the flood, the people were contempable in
the eyes of god, and when the flood came, it erased those that were not ready
for it. It is because they were not ready for the flood that god saw them
contemable. Of course, taking a literal view of the story breaks this down a
little. Because in the story, there was no such thing as rain, they did not
know about it, and so the people were not able to prepare for the flood which
they knew nothing of. But God tells only Noah to build the ark, and he puts the
animals on the ark, and then the flood comes. But I think it would be more
appropiate if god told everyone about the flood. If god spoke not onyl just to
noah but to everyone, and told them about the flood he was going to send, and
the people ignored god, and said that they had more important things to attend
to then the flood, that would be a much better telling of the story. Of course,
in this way, Noah could represent, "Those people who are wiser than others" and
it could be a story about listening to those who are more learned in a certain
area than you are, and to trust them. But this goes back to the notion of
faith, having faith in something that you know doesn't exist, and it's that
notion that I find so appalling about the bible. It's interesting, how I would
rewrite these myths to make them more readable. After all, who am I to re write
the bible? If I do so, does that make me a prophet? Can I take the role of the
prophet?

It's interesting, on Reddit today, I have recently subscribed to a few
different sub-reddits, ones about athiesm, agnosticism, religion, and a few
others, and on the atheism one, I found a post talking about how religion
should die, how it's an outdated concept, and how it should be removed from our
society. Of course, this is just one redditers, usually hostile, opinion, and
well, to say that religion should die for good I think is a wholly inncorrect
way to think about religion. I had a discussion about this with Daniel and
Shravik, and Jessi had gone to sleep on the couch, and we were discussing this
topic late into the night, and I remember saying, and I wholly believe this,
that religion is sort of the thing that carves the path for science. Religion
represents the very edge of what we understand. It pushes forth the concept of
"that which we don't understand" and we have to come up with a reason for that
which we don't understand, and then what happens is, we have these stories and
these myths, and those myths represent the idea of something which has truth in
it, but we don't fully understand it, so we have to represent it in this story.
Science then follows in those footsteps. Religion is always ahead of science,
but science is more exact then religion. So the problem becomes, when science
begins to approach religion, and we start to realize that our religion, the
religion that we as a people have had for years, is being outdated by our
current knowledge, and science starts to overtake the religion as we know it,
it means that that religion no longer represents the edge of our knowledge. In
one sense, it does, because religion still deals with topics that science has
not dealt with. But the issue becomes when science catches up with religion.
Religion is always neccesarily slow growing. Religion comes out of the
collected knowledge of many peoples aggregated over ages. And when you have the
birth of industry, of a sort of connection of all of the ideas and religions in
such a fast way, well, the different religion contradict (and of course they
do, they represent the very edge of that which we as humans are trying to
understand, and the edges are blurry), but we're able to pull them all together
and say, "wait, we have more knowledge than we thought we did, and we can share
our knowledge across the systems of communication that we have put forth (be it
railways, cars, airplanes, telegrams, and now the internet, and god knows how
we will connect even further in the future). We are playing with the forces of
god. We are creating the tower of babel. The internet is the tower of babel.
Holy shit, that's really cool. The internet is the tower of babel! That is the
flood.

How does the tower of babel go? The people began to build a structure up to the
heavens, so that they might become level with god, and in doing so, god I have
to read the story now, I'll be back... So I'm back, the tower of babel story is
short, but I find it very interesting. God does not actually destroy the people
in the story, nor does he destroy the tower, he simply makes it so that they
speak different languages, and they go to different areas, and they create
cities in this way. They all spoke one language, and in their cooridination,
they begin to build a tower, a tower to become even with god, and then god
confounds their lauguage so that they can no longer do so, and so they stop the
building of the tower (they are no longer coordinated enough to do so) and they
go to different cities.

So I'm not so sure that the internet really is the tower of babel. Is it? It's
really an interesting idea to me. There are stories we have of men conquering
the gods. Well, at least, I remember playing God of War, which is a hack and
slash game (really well made, pretty pivotal for being one of the games that
got the genre right) where you are a mortal, and you seek to go against the god
of war, because he wronged you. Ares wrongs Kratos (Kratos being the main
character of the story) and Kratos, in seeking vengence, goes to confront Ares.
It's a very modern telling of a greek myth, but it is very greek in it's
telling. I wish I had a better example, but that game strikes at the core of
what I think myths tell today. In most super hero stories, a lot of times the
villian can be something akin to a god. I have not watched the Marvel avengers,
(although I think that is required viewing if I am to begin to link the
mytholigies of the greeks and latins with the mythology of today) but I know
that in that movie (series of movies) the superheros all come together to fight
some eternal being in "the infinity war" or something equally as silly and
faux-epic. I don't know what this being is like, but I suppose this can be very
similar to the story of the angels fighting Satan in Paradise Lost, and
throwing him to the underworld. It's got to be something similar.

But the concept of men fighting against God, not "an immortal" but actually
god, I don't know if that myth really exists. To me it feels as though that
myth shouldn't exist. I am getting a little lost in my thinking though, I want
to return back to the idea of the internet, and aggregated knowledge catching
up to religion.

I firmly believe that Christianity is on it's way out, that the myths of
Christianity will have a similar sort of impact on us in the way that the myths
of the Greeks became outdated by the time of Ovid. Maybe it took someone like
Ovid to really hammer home the point that these gods are not real in the way we
thought they were. I'm actually quite curious about the nature of these myths,
and what sort of belief was held about them throughout time. It's actually
quite interesting, now that I think about it, we don't have very many popular
stories about Christ. We have the Passion of the Christ, but that's a one off
movie. We don't have very many "Christian" movies. I wonder why Paradise Lost
hasn't been made into a movie yet.
