# 20180703 Of my night, Dream of Crossfit, sleep paralysis, Dream of Marijuana and drug testing, discovery of my four characters for the hermit story
So I want to get this down before I forget it. This dream I had last night was
not too spectacular, but it is definitely worth writing down and setting off my
thoughts for this journal article with, as I feel there is definitely something
in it. Before I talk about the dream though, I want to say a little bit about
my night. So last night was what I would consider an ideal night. I went to bed
promptly after stuffing myself full of a turkey sandwich and a PBJ, along with
what must have been over a half a gallon of milk, before I laid down to rest
with my full stomach and my tablet. I woke up around four o'clock, which would
have been a good five cycles of sleep, all dreamless to my recollection. When I
woke, I got up and played the second part of the opus whatever it is of
Chopin's nocturnes in F minor and Eflat major, and I promptly decided that I
don't particularly care for this set and have elected to print out another to
occupy myself at the night like this. The second one is interesting, but I
don't have any emotion to it. I do find it neccesary to associate myself, or at
least become familiar with this sort of disconcordant harmony which I have
subconsciously stayed away from in the past simply due to the fact that it is
unfamiliar to me, but I quite like the sound of it when it is played well, and
I would like to familiarize myself with it so that I can better parse it and
understand it, so that my understanding of music as a whole will become more
enlightened as I continue on this path of neglecting my worldly
responsibilities in favor of indulgence in these fine arts. After I was
finished with that nocturne, I then went back towards the reading of the Grand
Inquisator of the Brother's Karamazov, and though I found it extremely lengthy
and unneccesarily archaic (at least the tranlsation by Garnett is so), it had a
cool little punch at the end, I liked the climax, even though I knew how it
was, but mostly I like where it fits in the story, rising tension happening
everywhere, and even so our characters are able to discuss this matter of
philosophy as if it is more important than all of the rising action that is
going on up to this point. Quite interesting indeed, if not a little pompous,
but the author makes note of this pompousness quite explictly, so it can be
excused as it is excused by the author himself.

But all of this has nothing to do with the dream I had that followed. Like most
of my dreams, I don't remember much of this one except that it had to do with
Crossfit. This Crossfit setting is different than the ones I've had in the
past. This one was a rather small gym, one story on the surface level (not the
one with the basement that I usually associate with Crossfit competition) with
one opening that faces west. And the fact that it faces west I know to be true,
or at least, I know that the direction the opening faces I strongly associate
with Left. This gym is much smaller than the big with with the pullup rig that
goes all around it in a square with two openings, this one is shaped rather in
two sort of rectangle areas, each connected, the northern one being more like a
square, and the southern one being more like a rectangle. And in the square
area, as will become relevent in the dream, there are two sets of pull up
rigs, one that is more reachable, and another that one would have to climb up
in some way to get to. However, the person on the upper pull up rig in the
dream is simply up there, and I did not think of how he got up there or how I
or anyone would get up there in order to use it, rather it was just a feature
of the gym that you could get up there and that it was completely normal. What
I remember about this gym is walking in, and talking with the owner. How I knew
he was the owner, I don't know, but he was and I knew it because it was a dream
and you just know these sorts of things in dreams. I don't remember the
conversation I had with the owner, but I do remember that it mostly involved me
asking him some questions, questions about his gym and such, and that the
nature of these questions was that I was asking him as if quizing him, not
because I had questions that I wanted answered for myself, but because I wanted
the answers from him so I could learn his answers. These are the sorts of
questions that I would ask (and have asked) Crossfit box owners about their box
in order to size them up. I then transitioned to talking about the workout we
would do for the day, to which he defered me to one of the others in the gym. I
must remind you that this gym was quite small, so while we were talking in the
southern part of the gym, there were two others who were working out in the
northern part, and the four of us brought the gym to its highest comfortable
capacity. Surely there could have been more in the gym to work out, but any
more than the four of us would have made the gym feel croweded. So I take a few
steps over to the other section of the gym, and I ask one of them what the
workout of the day is. The two people were already in the act of working out,
but not "doing a workout" or "WOD" as crossfiters would say, but instead doing
working sets and resting in between. So the person on the lower set of the
pullup rig, who was in between sets, begins to describe to me the workout that
they are doing, and the first thing he says is that it involves ninety pullups.
At this I inturupt him, saying that I am meant to do ninety pullup per round?
in a questioning way, because I knew this was supposed to be a very metcony
workout, and I knew that though I would be able to complete whatever workout
they threw my way, I also knew that ninety pullups per round would work much
more of a muscular endurance aspect of the movement rather than the breathing
heavy aspect, so I asked him something like "really, ninety pullups per round
or do you mean something else?" And then he replied something like, "well yeah,
we do things seriously here." which didn't answer my question at all, and I
immediately dismissed him as a foolish meathead who only concerned himself with
big numbers and used that to determine the quality of his workouts. The person
on the higher pull up rig, who was on top of it, who had overheard our
conversation (and how could he not, he was right there), then replies that no,
it's not ninety pullups per round, but instead nine pullups at the start of
each round, making a total of ninety. I then thanked him, and entirely
dismissed the first athelete, and focused my attention on this other one,
saying, "Okay, so describe to me the workout, it is 10 rounds of nine
pullups..." and I left the statement hanging there as if he were to finish it,
but then he did not. Now, I cannot remember if he went back to his workout, but
I think what happened is they both became a touch confused the first one more
so and the one on the rig I think more amused than anything, and this was near
the end of the dream, so I never got what the other movements of this workout
were meant to be, and I certainly didn't get to the point where I was ready to
start it. And that is where the dream ended.

I also find it pertinant to say that I did have some sleep paralysis at some
point in the night as well. I don't remember at what point in the timeline of
the night I had this paralysis, but it was accopanied by hallucinations again,
which now that I am aware that I do indeed hallucinate during my sleep
paralysis, I am made aware of the fact that the people I am imagining coming
into my room are not real, and I was able to rest easier and almost enjoy the
feeling of paralysis. Yes, enjoy is the word I would use. And in order to
justify my use of that word I should say a bit about yesterday.

Yesterday was a rough day for me. Currently I have been assigned a programming
case which I am not quite sure at all what to do with, and instead of working
on it I continued to work on learning Russian (which I think I have finally
narrowed in on a couple of primary resources I want to use, as well formulated
my conception of how I want to help myself learn vocabulary, so the hours I
spent yesterday, though they felt in vain a bit, were acutally quite fruitful
in my whole endeavor) and writing the story of the King and the Dragon, and
doing all sorts of other unproductive things, unproductive in relation to my
work at least, and I began to feel quite guilty of it all. That, coupled with
the empty stomach (I had not eaten enough the night before) and the feeling of
tiredness (which I blamed on the fact that the people of Alliant take great
concern in me taking a twenty minute nap during the afternoon, which I can
understand their jealousy of, but we would all be better off if we could take
such naps) led to a rather shitty late afternoon, which was only redeemed what
I was able to steal a nap during the spine strengthening series of Bikram Yoga
which I dread so much. I really hate the poses involved in the spine
strengthening series, I think they are silly and dumb and I don't like them,
which they would say indicates that they are the poses that I need the most,
but I disagree, saying instead that I would much rather work shoulder related
poses in that time as my shoulders need so much more opening than my spine
needs strengthening, and the soreness I feel in my back come entirely from that
god-awful series. I digress. The point is that I had a rough day yesterday, and
in reflection of that day I determined that it was mostly caused by lack of
sleep and lack of food, both of which are things that are in my control and
both of which are things that I neglected the night before, the food much more
so than the sleep as, though I know certain things that hinder sleep, I don't
have quite as much control over that aspect than I do the ability to jam food
in my mouth.

And that is why I say I could enjoy the sleep paralysis. Once I knew the
hallucinations, I was able to determine, by looking at my door, that indeed it
was shut, and the going in and out of my room that I thought I heard was indeed
hallucination. Indeed, if I describe the hallucinations as if I thought they
were real, I thought that what I saw was someone entering and exiting my
apartment, I heard the door opening and closing (and since I forget at what
point in the night these hallucinations happened, it is plausible, though I
think not likely that these door sounds could have been real), and I heard
speaking, as if there were someone talking to someone else as one worker would
talk to another about the work they are doing, and I thought I even saw the
figure of someone over my box which I am sleeping behind right now. However, I
was able to look over to the corner of my door, and I saw that the sound of the
door opening and closing was not accompanied by my door actually opening and
closing, so using this I was able to determine that the hallucinations were not
real and I was able to let myself rest there more soundly. In fact, I at that
point attempted to embrace the feeling of paralysis, because even though I know
the ways to bring myself out of the paralysis when it happens (focusing on the
breath is the biggest one, and ensuring that it goes in and out in deep full
breaths) I knew that the paralysis was a good thing. I knew that it wasn't time
to wake up and that I wanted to continue to sleep, so I embraced the paralysis,
and was glad in it. And that feeling of paralysis suddenly felt pleasurable. It
was the kind of pleasure one feels on the toungue when you place a tasty bit of
food on it, but instead of simply feeling it on the tongue I felt it throughout
my entire being (since the body is paralyzed, the concept of feeling a
sensation at a certain part of the body is gone entirely, so that all of your
sensation is the sensation of your being rather than the sensation of any
particular nerve). This sensation was not pleasure, in the traditional sense,
like one might think of orgasm though, instead this was the feeling one gets
when you lay in your bed and you know you should get up, but you don't, except
instead of having the ability to get up and feeling all of your limbs be heavy,
you don't feel heavy limbs but instead feel as though you are just a spirit in
space. This feeling can be very scary, especially if you try and resist it and
attempt to move your limbs (which I remind you are paralyzed), but once I was
able to accept it and realized that it was the feeling that I wanted to
embrace, I was able to embrace it, and then I returned to sleep.

I feel very compelled now to write about the dream I had. This dream was very
vivid and involved the consumption of Marijuana and the subsequent drug testing
that would happen, along with alot of other symbolism involving my mom, the
setting and other things, that I do truly have to write about it. This dream
happened after a nap occuring on July the third, after we were dismissed early
from work, and I decided to lay my head down despite the fact that I knew I had
signed up for Bikram yoga that day at 5. This dream actually occured
immediately after I had woken up at five o'clock almost precisely, and saw that
I would indeed be missing my Bikram yoga class for the day.

This dream began in a house that was almost exactly like the Franda's, a dream
location that I know I have had before, and which truely was the spitting image
of the Franda's old house from my childhood. In this location, on the stove,
there was a bit of Marijuana, and for some reason, which I had reciprocated
with my mom, who agreed, I had determined that it was required for me to take a
hit of marijuana, and subsequently get drug tested immediately following, in
order to mark the beginning of the process which I have literally just today
signed on to. So in the dream I had rolled up a joint (in these dreams it is
always a joint even though as I've said before I don't know how to roll a joint
in real life and the joint is very much not my prefered methode of consumption)
at the stove of the Franda's, and I took a sort of ritualistic hit, savoring it
as a convict on death row might savor his last meal (that analogy is mine in
this moment, I wasn't thinking about death row in the dream, but I simply
wanted to emphasize that I savored it as a man condemned might savor something)
before proceeding to talk to my mom about what needs to be done. I discussed
with her the plan, and after I had taken the hit, I came to her, or she to me,
in that place of the Franda's, and talked about what needed to be done. I gave
her the paperwork, and we went together to the place where I was to get tested.
Now, this place, which was just down the road from the Franda's place where the
dream started, we were able to walk to, and I know I have been to this place
before in my dreams, although I forget in what context this dream location
exists, but it's description I will describe now. In the bottom floor, you walk
in from the corner, and the first thing you see straight ahead is door to an
inner stairwell which leads to the upstairs area, which when you are in the
upstairs area is not really upstairs, but to the left and right of this stair
well entrance, coming at ninety degrees from the corner through which you walk,
is a big open area, one could imagine being in an airport or stadium or
something else that has this area, and to the left there is a laser tag
section, which I have had dreams about before, and to the right, I'm not sure.
This area reminds me very greatly of some other dream locations which are
appearing to me as a write this almost against my will, as I try and imagine
which dream area this one truely was, I have all these other dream locations
appearing in my mind, so this location must have some sort of significance to
me. Regardless, we, me and my mom, looked around this area, left and then
right, before deciding that up was the direction we needed to go. And I want to
mention at this point as well that this place was a place intended for
children, that this establishment was created for the amusement of children,
similar to Chuck E Cheese or similar, but for slightly older children, and as
we went up this stairwell, which the stairwell itself had this sort of
steampunk back alley feel to it, as if the walls and floors hadn't been cleaned
in years, we made it to the up stairs area. Now this upstairs area, as you walk
up into it, had this peculiar feature. There was a sort of walkway, where as
you come up the stairs (there was no exit door to the stairs, even though there
should have been) on your left is a wall that comes up to about chest height,
which when you get high enough on the stairs you can easily see over into the
room to the left, and this wall goes on from the top of the stairs a good way,
maybe three or four yards, until you get to the top right-most of the room,
which has a doorway into the "employees only" area of the room. Upon coming to
this sort of walkway, I look to the left to see many children in roller skates
going around on this roller rink, as this upstairs area is a roller rink, and
the wall that you can look over marks the edge of the rink. Evenutually the
wall comes down, to the floor where the rink meets the walkway, indicating the
perimeter of the rink, and the entire place was dark except for one opening
that was past the walkway beyond the chest high wallway where it is open and
leads to somewhere with light. I want to talk about this place with light for a
moment, because it does not simply lead outside, but it leads to another
portion of the dream area which surely must represent something else to me,
but I don't know what in this moment, and I don't know if I have ever been
there before, but I see in my head right now a sort of air hanger area, a
garage sort of space, where you could imagine that airplanes are kept, antique
single passengers airplanes, but this area does not come up again in the dream.
I don't know why this area feels significant to me, but it does. Regardless,
when we reach the top of the staircase, we are greeted by a man, clearly a
young kid no older than me or at the very most my age who works there, and
seeing this peculiar thing of a grown man walking up these stairs with his mom
to this place clearly intended for children, he inquires if he can help us. I
take a breif glance to my mom, who gives me the gesture to take care of this as
an adult would, and I speak to him and request in that moment, to be
administered a drug test. Actually I asked first if they administer drug tests,
but I didn't wait for the answer and simply then requested to be admistered
one. He asks me for my paperwork, which I remember pulling out of my pocket,
and looking to my mom as if to ask in one moment of eye-contact "this is
correct right?" to which she nods. After procuring the paper-work, he then asks
me, "and this drug test is meant to return clean is it not?" to which I at
first say yes, of course, but then remember that I had taken a hit of the
joint, and at that moment the reason for taking that hit escapes me, and for
the first time in the dream I start to realize that maybe the reason I took the
hit was illegitament, and that I just come up with it as an excuse to take a
hit, but I then thought that that, also, was an absurd thought, and that I had
distinctly remembered being against taking the hit at first but indeed did have
very legitamte reason for doing so, but that reason was escaping me. I tried to
explain this to the worker there, who looked at me with a sort of guilty
glance, as if he knew that I was full of shit, and I remember asking to call my
attorney after the test had been done, or I actually asked my mom to call the
attorney, because she didn't know the reason for my taking the hit. Eventually,
after the judgemental (that's the word!) glance from the attendent there lasted
a bit, I remember asking to be adminstered the test anyway, and to let it come
back positive and that I knew that that was the plan, although I was second
guessing myself the entire time. The attendendent, still with his judgemental
look on his face, takes me through the employees only area at the back right of
the room from the stairs, and in this area is a kitchen area, much closed off
from the rink area and much more enclosed and almost even claustrophobic, and
in this kitchen area is an employees only bathroom which I am led into. This
bathroom was a single person restroom, and was quite unkept, being very dirty
and rusty as a neglected outdoors camping restroom might be, and in this place
I took all of things I had in my hand and put them on the sink which was there
next to the toilet, and I found the cup I was meant to pee into. In all of
those things I also saw my phone, which I thought about the illigatamcy of the
whole thing (as if I could somehow produce clean piss from my phone) and
thought about using it to get the reason for taking the hit from my attorney,
but I knew my mom was calling him so I didn't. So at this point we are nearing
the end of the dream, as I took the cup, and also this device which looked like
a pregnancy test, and I started peeing into the cup, and interjected this other
testing device between the stream and the cup, and immediately the device
showed a blue line indicating that the urine was not clean (which I had for
some reason thought it wouldn't even though I had just smoked weed earlier in
the dream), and I began to go into a sort of calm panic, if that makes sense,
knowing that panicing wasn't worthwhile in that situation, but not having any
other sensible thing to do. After doing this, for some reason to complete the
task I had to apply a sort of sticker to the underside of my penis, which had
become incredibly erect all of a sudden, as if it had been erect the whole time
and I hadn't realized it, and I heard my mom outside talking with the
administer of the test, speaking about just how clean I had been the past days,
knowing it to be true, and also talking about how I had given up masterbation
as well, and how she was so impressed by it, and that he must have had a good
reason to smoke the marijuana because he has been otherwise extremely faithful
to staying clean. So as I am applying this sticker thing to my extremely erect
(and to go into detail, very veiny and almost even the texture of glass, as I
thought about how it resemebles the pipe that I like to smoke out of, and as I
thought this the veins started to resemeble strongly the artistic markings on
my pipe, and though I have made the pipe/penis analog in my head before, who
hasn't, I had not made the analogy of the veins to the decorative marking
before), as I am applying this sticker, and listening to my mom talk so highly
of me, I felt as though somehow everything would be okay. I thought about how I
did not have even the slightest compulsion to stroke that large penis to orgasm
so as to lower it, but instead I just let it be entirely erect and did nothing
to try and prevent it. So I applied this sticker to the underside of my erect
penis, and closed up the cup and put all of the things aside, and that was the
end of the dream. The dream ended before I knew anything about what would
happen as a result of that test.

I will remark that I did have a bit of wood as I woke up, (although not nearly
as much as the dream would have indicated, just a slight chubby that went down
rather quickly after waking) and that this was one of those times where I had
to gather myself and remind myself that I had not in actuality smoked anything,
and I want to say that I felt rather dehydrated and "numb" in a way that I
sometimes do when I take naps of this single REM length. Indeed, when I woke I
found the length of the sleep to be exactly one sleep cycle, as I woke at 6:35,
which would mark out exactly one full cycle of REM sleep. I then lay there,
deciding to wake up, and I have been writing ever since, which has taken just
under an hour to do.

I could have dismissed this dream a simply another marijuana dream, but there
seems to be something more here, the images of unclean area, the judgmental
(and now that I think about it probably hypocritical) look on the attendents
face, and the fact that my mom is there, and that she knows about my giving up
masterbation (I have told her about this before and we have had discussions
about it), and the peculiar erection that I had towards the end, all point to
something, but I can't put all the peices of it together, but I can only leave
it as it is so that one day maybe I'll read it back and still not know what it
all means but instead will simply just live with it being there. The dependance
on my mother is what troubles me the most, similar to a past dream I have
written about, where it is simply there, and as much as I don't want to label
it or assign it anything, I can only think that I dislike that aspect of my
subconscious, and it gives me curiosity as to when that aspect might go away. I
don't know.

At this moment, now, I have a compulsion to write. Indeed, there is this story
that I have thought of, that I haven't had the time to discover yet, but I
think it is time to discover it.

Inside of me, there are four characters. Each of these characters falls on a
different end of a two by two square, the sorts of two by two squares that are
a part of any good ted talk, the kind of two by two square that always aims to
oversimplify something so as to make it understandable to the most stupid of
audiences, stupid in the sense that even though the individuals in that
audience may each be intellgent, the intersection of the intellegence of the
whole of the group could be said to have the IQ of only the most dull of farm
animals. The sort of stupidity that smart people will see be able to apply to
their own intelligence in an intellegent way, but when taken on its own and
analyzed as it's own work is taken as nothing but a gross oversimplifaction of
a vast and varied topic that scholars of many ages have wrestled with through
debate across grand scenes with wide implications on the thought and cultures
of our people.

My square is thus: on one dimension, we have the belief in Christianity, in
God, the God of the bible, and on the other dimension, we have dogmatism in
belief. So you can see the four extremes of these two spectrums. On the one
extreme end, we have the dogmatic Christian, believing in Christianity wholely
and completely, taking part in rituals of faith. On the other extreme end, we
have the dogmatic Atheist, in all his grossness of oversimplifications. Next,
we have the concept of the accepting Christian, similar to say Grant or Tim in
my own life, and then we have the character most representing myself, the
skeptical agnostic, seeing the reasonablness of everything and taking as few
axioms from the world as he can.

In my work, I will make no attempt to glorify the character representing
myself. In fact, I would very much like the reasonable Christian to be the
focus of the work, and have him be the protagonist in the story.

How these four become friends, I do not know yet. What brings them together?
What is the thing that makes these four inteact? It must be something wholly
unrelated to Christianity, some worldly pursuit that they all share. Maybe they
all play on the same sports team? I think for this story to work, it must be
written like a novel, similar to something like Anna Karenina, where the
characters each have their own affairs and their own dealings, and I need to be
able to explore each of them as individuals, and in pairs, and all together, in
order to get the whole of my work written in adequete fashion.

What is the setting of my story? I have failed to mention a fifth character,
the fifth cardinal direction, of a man, a hermit, taken as a spiritual figure,
who dies at the time of the characters, and found are his notes, his tomes, at
first scattered, but later compiled and put together. These writings will be of
my mythology. And at this point it is important to lay out the mythology of the
story. I want this man to tell his mythology in dreams, and in visions. I want
the mythology to be revealed through the lens of this hermit. I also want to
very much explore the mind of the hermit. I want there to be articles written
by him which are simply idle musings by him, where he questions his own visions
and questions his motivations for hermitage. I need to seclude myself for some
time in order to truly acheive this effect. When will that happen? I don't
know. If I am to marry and have children, I don't know when that might occur.
But I hope for my sake that it does.

I don't know what will be my mythology. So far I have several disconnected
stories, and I hope that through my dreams and my sparks of ideas that I have
and write into this journal that I can come up with an adequeate mythology. So
far I have the story of the King and the Dragon, but that is more of a tale
than a mythology. The dragon and the King would fit more in the history of my
world, similar to how Tolkien's middle earth is really an alternate history of
our earth, rather than a part of the mythology. But still, I need a mythology
as well.

How this mythology interacts with our real world, I am still not sure yet. I
want it to be through prophets and such, but I want the prophets to be
unreliable. I don't want there to ever be a sense of these people knowing for
certian the mythology. However, I want their stories to verify eachother
independently. This is difficult to do without making their stories self
fullfilling. In fact, that could be a crucial aspect of the whole thing as
well, including prophets who are found to be false. I also want to include real
prophets from our time, your David's and your Isaiah's and Mohammeds and such.
I want these prophets to be used more as reference though, I want the prophets
in my story to reference these and perhaps be aware of them, but I don't want
them to actually be a part of the mythology.

All of this is so mixed up in my head as to what I want. So far the only
original creation that I have is the character of Fice, who is a sort of
Devil's accomplice, as well as the original idea of the headless angels, those
that lose their way and impale themselves in order to gain their flight again.
Both of these concepts are very much concepts conceived of by my college self,
and I think that I have to let go of them because I didn't write about them
when I was in college, and those concepts and ideas are not so dear to me now
as others are.

I have a very strong inclination to talk about injustice, especially due to the
recent events of my life, the events being my dad's diagnosis of Lukemia as
well as my being charged with a felony. The adjudicator is a member of this
mythology.


