# 20180830
So last night was a weird night. I know I had dreams last night, but it was
similar to the night before, where it was more abstract, about putting together
chains and networks, and things of that nature, rather than actually dreaming
about anything.

I was dreaming today about different price types. I remeber the price type 8,
9, and 12 kept coming up in my dreams. One of the first things I did when I
came in today was look at what price type 12 is, and it is something wholly
unrelated to the things I have been working on. However, what I have been
working on has to do with price type 8, 9, and 21, so I imagine that is where
12 came from, it's an inversion of the dream work. I don't remember what it
was, but it was similar to the holes in the sheet of my previous dream.

What was strange about last night, though, had not to do with my dreams. It had
rather to do with something that happened to me in my ear in the night.

So lately, (and I have not written about this because I am still in denial
about it) there have been ants in my apartment. I Have been doing my best to
avoid them as well as possible, but since I sleep on the floor, it seems as
though it's impossible to avoid them entirely. So far, it's been rather
harmless, and I do my best to stay away from teh walls and teh cracks, and I do
my best to shake out my mat and such, and not expose myself to the carpet where
the ants are easier to get to me.

Well, I don't know what actually happened, and I seriously doubt it was an ant,
because that would have been way more painful I imagine, especially if it was
alive and bit me anywhere in the ear. But I woke up at about 2 in the morning,
with this "Paper bag crinkling" sound in my ear. It was my right ear. And I
remember thinking, "This feels as though there is something rubbing against my
ear drum." and I thought that perhaps an ant had crawled up in there and was
walking on my ear drum, or at least in my ear tube. Of course, that's absurd,
but that didn't stop me from googling about it, "Paper bag in ear sound" and
things of that nature. Eventually, I stopped googling, and took the advice of
one of the people there, who said he just layed on his side and let gravity do
teh work of dispensing of some fluid which was in his ear. I thought, "That
probably makes the most sense, excess earwax might cause something like this."
So after having showered and read about things, I went back to bed. I have
woken up and the crinkling is gone, but I don't know for how long, or rather,
I'm not sure why the crinkling was there in the first place, and why it is
gone.

So last night, as you could read in the previous journal, I had the idea to ask
Gerald about what it is that is going on with me. I am hesitant to do this,
because, well, a few reasons. First, I have not ever consulted Gerald in this
way before, I have a notebook that I consult Gerald on things with. Second,
disturbing Gerald is not something I like to do often. I more or less know what
he is going to tell me, for the most part, and I'm not sure I am ready to hear
it.

So it has been a good couple hours later, and I feel that I am not prepared to
evoke Gerald. Rather I am prepared to evoke Gerald, but it feels wrong to do it
in this environment, with this medium. Gerald has always come out on that
notebook, the notebook I have in my room now, and evoking him at work like
this, in a text editor, when I might get inturrupted, is simply wrong.

So instead of evoking Gerald, I will instead simply talk about something else.

I am having a very difficult time "kicking off" my discussion here. With the
quote about the absolute, which I wrote down in my "quotes" document, I had a
pretty good idea about where I wanted to start, and the objections that were
raised came rather organically. But here, I don't really know where I want to
start, and objections to that non-starting point naturally won't come naturally
if I don't even have the starting point.

I do want to talk about, though, the other ways one can choose to live you
life. In fact, I want to talk about free will.

Many people I know talk about free will, and they say, "I don't believe that
humans have free will." And to say something like this is a very blanket claim,
and one that must be unpacked. The argument goes like this.

If we are able to determine the course of objcets such as balls and bats, and
their movement in space is determined by things like newtonian forces, and
gravity, and the like, and if we are given a complete enough explanation of the
initial conditions which create this system, then we are able to completely
determine the path of the ball with these forces, and in so doing are able to
predict how the ball will behave.

Now, suppose that we take this Newtonian viewpoint, that all things are
essentially composed of very small balls, and we are given the whole initial
conditions for a human being in a certain environment. Suppose also, in order
to simplify the thought experiment and make it more clear, that we set up the
initial conditions like so. Suppose a certain human being wants to enclose
himself in a small self contained room, big enough for him to stand up and walk
around in, and do things. Perhaps the room is 4 meters wide each way and 3
meters high. And this person wishes to enclose himself in this room for some
time, let's say forty minutes, for the purposes of meditation. But he does not
wish merely to meditate, the man wishes to walk around, and pace, and speak out
his mind, and so on, and do these simple acts while he is in the room.

And so we are clear, suppose also that the room is not influenced at all from
external factors. There is no incoming sound, no incoming radiation, no
incoming light, etc. Suppose the room is entirely closed, and that it has
enough light for the man to see, and it has enough air for the man to breathe.
Such a set up is wholly unacheiveable in it's perfection, but we can imagine
such a system in theory, so far as it concerns us for this thought experiment,
that is well insulated enough so as not to have an effect on the doings of the
man.

I suppose even, that this condition that the room is insulated is not
neccasary, but it helps in making the thought experiment more clear. We could
say "All the ways in which the room is not insulated are known to us." So we
could say, "The room is rather well insulated, and in the ways it is not, we
know all of the ways that it is not from a purely objective way." So let's move
on from this point.

So suppose now that the man steps in to the room. In this room, we have some
device which is somehow able to take a snapshot of the room. Such a device does
not exist to us today, but imagine that we had such a device that we could take
a perfect snapshot of the state of all things at the start of the experiment.
It is like an X-Ray, which is able to take an image of the bones of the human
being, but this device does more than an X-Ray. It is able to take a perfect
3-d model of every thing about this human being.

Such a thing is not so fantastical as you might think at first. Let us go
through some examples, starting with the most simple, and moving on to the most
complex.

So for the simplest example, let us place a ball in the center of the room.
That's it. This machine, or device, would take a snapshot of this room, and it
would see the ball in the center. It would be able to create a model of the
ball, and we could say, "This is the exact state of the ball in the room." We
would then go on to say, "We can determine the state of the room based upon
these initial conditions at any point in time." And of course, the state of the
ball is sitting still, where it was placed at the start of the experiment.

Let us make a more complex scenario, and then provide some commentary. Suppose
that this time, we take our ball, and we place some double sided sticky tape
onto the ball. We then pierce the ball with a nail, and tie a string to this
nail. The other end of the string we fasten to the ceiling. Then, we say that
the initial conditon is, "We stick the ball to the wall, with the string
attached to it." And so we take our snapshot with our machine, and this is the
initial condition of the room.

So let's dive in to what happens in this scenario. Suppose the double sided
sticky tape is okay, but it is not quite good enough to hold the ball to the
wall for very long. So in this scenario, what will happen is, the tape will
eventually start to peel off of the wall, due to the fact that it is not
perfect tape, and eventually it will release the ball. Since the ball is
attached to the string, it will swing down, and create a pendulum. So the ball
will swing back and forth at this point, and due to the air resistance and
friction of the string and the ball, will eventually die down to a slower and
slower swing, until it eventually stops.

So now, let us go into the details of our machine. Our machine is so
sophisticated, and so accurate, that it is able to determine every particle of
sticky substance, and every particle of the ball and the string, and every
particle of air that will cause air resistance, and so on and so on, to give us
an entirely perfect set of initial conditions. So we know exactly how sticky
the tape is, and with that we can determine the time that ball will release
from the wall, and we know exactly how resistant the air and the string are,
and with that we can determine the path of the pendulum with time, and it is so
perfect that we can determine all of these things exactly as they should happen
according to the theory of Physics with which we are all familiar to some
degree.

At this point, I have only mentioned that this device takes a snapshot of the
initial conditions. So rather than that, let us say that somehow, this device
is able to give us "the complete timeline of the conditions." That is, at every
point in space and time, it is able to tell us exactly what the state of the
room is at that moment. So with this, we are able to see exactly the state of
everything at every moment is truely playing out, and we are able to do this
without altering the state of the room in any way.

At this point you say, "But such a device is impossible, I have read something
by some popular physicist and it says that Schrodinger determined that his cat
is both alive and dead at the same time or something, and so the act of
observation disturbs the thing which is being observed."

To this I say, one should always be wary of any explanation of what something
like quantum mechanics means. Physics is concerned with things such as, "These
are our lab results, and these equations fit the model of our lab results, and
these equations seem to do so for all of the lab results that everyone has
acquired, so we will work with the hypothesis that these equations model the
world, and use them to predict what we might see happen in the future."
However, physics does not seek to answer, "Why is it that these equations fit
the model of our data," and any explanation to why always goes to the realm of
philosophy. So for a moment, allow me the indulgence of saying that such a
device exists, and let us resume on our discussion.

So with this device we are able to take the state of the room at any point in
time.

The theory of free will is this, then. If a man with a device such as this is
able to create a theory which, based upon the initial conditions given to him
by the device, leads him to generate, without referencing the device beyond the
initial conditions, the state of the room at all future moments, then the
object in that room does not have free will in any way, and his path in the
universe is predetermined.

Such a notion is rather simple to accept for our balls and strings. You say,
"given the intial conditions of the room, so accurately modeled that we know
exactly the strength of each grain of stickiness on the double sided tape, and
we know exactly the density of every air molucule in the room, and so on, and
given as much computing power as we desire, we could determine the state of the
room at any point in time by modeling the room according to the rules of
physics and the intial state of the room, and so, the ball has no say in it's
position in the room relative to time, and the position of the ball is not
goverened by the ball's free will (and how silly it is to think of the free
will of a ball) and instead is predetermined by the rules which govern the
universe.

Such a notion is easy to accept in the case of the ball. We have glanced over
many holes in this argument that I don't want to address at this very moment,
but instead I wish to then take this a step further.

Suppose we placed a man in the room. With our machine, we are able to take a
snapshot of the state of the room at any point in time. We know exactly what
point in space a certain hemoglobin that is coursing through the mans veins is
at any point in time, and we are able to track the movement of taht hemoglobin
through time with our device. We are able to do this with every hemoglobin, and
every white blood cell, and so on. We are able to determine the exact location
and movement of a skin cell, or a bone marrow cell, or any other such cell, and
we are able to do so. We are also able to track the movement of the neurons,
not only of the neurons themselves, but also the potasium, and the magnisium,
ad whatever other substances are involved with the firing of synapses and the
transmission of electrical information through the neurons of the brain, to the
neurons of the spine, down to the neurons that attach to the muscles. We are
able to see all of these things, and complete determine their position in
space.

With such a jump in complexity, it becames much more difficult to make the
claim that, "given the initial conditions of the room, we are able to predict
the state of all of these things at any point in time afterward, given enough
computing power and the laws of physics." And of course, we are again at the
conundrum of "well, such computing power doesn't exist, and even if we did
somehow generate a computer embedded in this universe that was able simulate
our universe (which is, in itself, a very interesting question of possiblity)
and suppose somehow that we actually knew "the laws of the universe which
govern everything", supposing all of these things, the question then becomes
one of complexity and practicality of determining the course of the object in
the room, rather than a question of free will.

But here, we have made many assumptions. But the assumptions we have made, I
want to be clear, have nothing to do with the question about something innate
or special about human beings, but rather have to do with the questions such as
this. I think the most glaring question is, "Who are we to say that the
universe can be fully explained by certain rules?"

What I mean is this. I have been taking a Newtonian viewpoint on this whole
topic, but as I mentioned before, we have conducted experiments which show that
the Newtonian viewpoint is only true for certain degrees of measurement. When
things get sufficiently small, or when relative speeds get sufficiently large,
and so on, we have seen that the physics of Newton do not apply to the data
which we have accrued on these things.

But even more than that though, this begs the question of whether or not there
is something of "an absolute ruleset of the universe" and we just missed the
mark with Newtonian Physics, and that perhaps when science advances far enough,
and we gather enough research and enough data and enough brilliant minds to
come up with something more accurate we will eventually come to this absolute
ruleset, or rather, "there is no absolute ruleset of the universe that explains
everything," in which case, we must scratch our heads and wonder foreces
underly the universe that drive it.

Now, at this juncture we have hit the crux of our issue with not only free
will, but everything, and navigating these waters must be taken with great
care. It is the view of the objectivist that there is a complete model which
could be used to entirely describe the universe as we know it, and we just
aren't advanced enough or smart enough to know it. It is this view that is
easiest to talk about and to reason about. But just because it makes sense
doesn't mean that it's correct.

And this passes back on to where I started. I wished, with my thoughts, to give
another view than the objectivist, but I am finding that such a thing is very
difficult to describe in it's proper way.

I suppose, in detailing out my thought experement in this way, what I have come
to is this.

If there exist rules that determine the state of something based upon some
initial conditions, and these rules are the most correct rules, the
"fundemental rules of the universe", then there is no way that a notion of free
will can exist. Likewise, if something like free will exists, then there do not
exist rules that can exactly determine the state of the future given the state
of the present.

But such a distillation of this idea is very very naive. In fact, we have not
even talked about what "free will" might mean. So let's begin anew there.

First, let's talk about choice. So when someone says that they believe in "Free
will" what they are talking about is choice. "I can go to the dance, or I can
stay at home." And it's up to the choice of the angsty teen whether or not he
wants to go to the dance...

So I have just taken a shit, and came back to write more about this. Rather
than talk about, "What does choice mean within the context of objectivism," I
rather want to try and circle back around to my orginial viewpoint, that the
objective, or absolute, viewpoint, is rather only one method of deterimining
the nature of the universe.

So I want to talk about a view point that I am not sure what sort of name it
has, but I choose to call something like "consciousism." Something like that.

And before I even begin to talk about this viewpoint, which quite honestly I
have not really fully formulated in my head yet, I want to start with something
I heard Jordan Peterson say, and I want to launch from there.

So when a baby is first discovering the world, and really, any time we as human
beings discover new things, we don't go to the objective nature of those things
first in trying to understand them. We have a much different method of looking
at these things. Peterson gave the example of a cliff. The objectivist
viewpoint is that this cliff is such and such height, and inside the cliff
there are such and such materials, such as dirt and rock and grass, and it has
a shape, which you could draw, or you could model using some sort of 3d
modeling techniques or whatever such, and it with this shape and this material
has this design. From there you could even talk about how the cliff formed
across time, and what will happen to the cliff as time goes on, how it might
erode or something. But this is the objectivist viewpoint on what a cliff is.

However, a baby, when first encounted with this cliff, will instantly recognize
it as a place that it can fall. It will approach the cliff, and when the baby
starts to realize that there is no more ground it is crawling on, it will
recognize the cliff as "A falling off place" and avoid it.

So in this way, what some would say is "the absolute truth" of the cliff, that
it is this shape and this height and made up of these things, can really be
seen as something entirely different. It can be seen as "a place that one can
fall off"

Now, I know at this point, the objectivist will see where this train of thought
is leading, and will have instant objections to where I'm going. "Of course,
the baby isn't able to process the objective nature of the cliff, so it has to
come up with something that approximates the cliff in order for it's primative
baby brain to try and understand, and then when it gets a better understanding
for how the world really is, the baby will be able to replace it's
understanding of the cliff as a "falling off place," to the more correct notion
of the cliff as a geometrical structure in space."

Now, this argument is compelling, but now I must be the one to object, because
I argue, that truely, we as humans don't ever truely dismiss the idea that the
cliff is a falling off place. Sure, if we want to talk about the geological
significance of the cliff, and it formation across time, we will view the cliff
from a purely objective standpoint, but when we are jogging through the
mountains, and we are on a path, and we run by a cliff, in the middle of the
jog we will not think of the cliff as a geometrical structure, but instead as a
falling off place. So, even when we have developed and understood the objective
nature of the cliff, we still maintain this more primitive framework.

Again, the objectivist will anticipate me again, and say, "Still, that is just
an approximation of the cliff that you use in that moment because you can't be
bothered to see the whole objectivist viewpoint in that case. You see the cliff
as a falling off place, but really the cliff is just this objective geometrical
structure."

To this, I do not have a real objection. At this point, an counter argument or
furtherment of this sort of discussion would simply be for teh point of being
argumentative, and it will quickly degrade to a discussion of semantics. So
instead, I will simply say this in regards to my point.

The notion of the cliff as a "falling off place" is an entirely valid way of
seeing the cliff, and has it's strengths in the fact that as a human it is the
best way to determine your course of action when navigating a cliff. The
objcetive interpration is the "correct" interpretation to use in some cases,
for instance, in determining the geology of the cliff formation, but when
jogging by the cliff, it could be argued that a more correct interpretation
would be of the cliff as "A falling off place."

And here I have just introduced, quite innocuously, the notion of relative
correctness. What does it mean for something to be correct in this way? Such a
notion is very much a difficult one to answer. All that I know that I can say
about it at this point, though, is that, in the case of the jogger it is more
correct to interpret the cliff as a falling off place, and for the geologist,
it is more correct to see the cliff as a geometric structure.

So that begins to get at the point that I want to get. When it comes to finding
the "Theory of Everything" (a phrase that I have carefully avoided up to this
point) one has to deterimine this. If such an objectivist theory of everything
existed, would it be superior to the theory of cliffs as falling off points?
The most dogmatic of objectivists will argue, "Of course not, any other theory
will fall under the theory of everything, and could be derived from it. So the
theory of cliffs as falling off points would have to fall under this theory"
But to that I say, this is absurd. Surely, if there were a theory of everything,
and if humans were able to understand it (both of which are claims which are by
no means self evident) then it wouldn't be comprensible to someone like a baby.
Of course not. Baby's will still have their own way of development, and the
grasping of the theory of everything will not come until much much later in the
development of the child, if we lived in a world where it existed.

So even in this hypothetical world where not only is there a theory of
everything, but also we are able to come up with the theory of everything, this
theory would not cover "how one should act around a cliff."

Again, I get again to the notion of determinism, and well, I don't want to run
down this rabbit hole again. My entire point is, that there are multiple ways
of viewing the world. Even in the best case scenario for the objectivist, where
this objectivist is able to come up with the holy grail of his point of view,
there are still other points of view which will be more correct than the
objectivist view.

And such a thing is interesting. It is the concept of "what does correct mean"
then that is important. And a view is correct, or rather, "more correct", if
living your life within this view leads to a greater good.

But here I must laugh, we have merely subverted the defintion of "correct" in
this case to the defintion of good. And what is good? Rather, what is
goodness? How do you determine if something is good? Does this mean good and
evil, or does it mean good and bad? Or perhaps merely good versus excellent.

You see the difficulty in trying to talk about these things. When one says
"good" you have with you the notion of all these different forms of good, and
who is to say that I might be talking about one form, and you might be talking
about a totally different form.

So I will try and explain my notion of goodness in this way. A jogger who runs
by a cliff and doesn't fall off, that is good. A jogger who, not understanding
that falling off of cliffs can lead to injury and death, misinterpretes the
consequences of running off the cliff and runs off the cliff to his death, that
is bad.

And you might say, "but why is death bad, and why is avoiding death good? From
where does that notion of good and bad come?" To this I say, it comes from
experience.

I am rather running out of brain energy at this point. I must go for a jog, and
return back here. I will cut the writing for the day, I think.

Something I have found though, something I have discovered, the tale of the
hermit is a work about the theory of everything.
