# 20180901
So last night I know I had a dream, I had a few dreams, but some of the dreams
I know were distraction dreams. The thing is, I think I had two real dreams,
and I am pretty certain I remember one of the dreams, but not the first one,
and it was this first one that I wanted to remember more. I remember waking up,
and trying to keep in my head a trigger which would bring me to the rest of the
dream. It might happen like it has in the past, where once I start to talk
about this dream, the dream that I remember, the first dream will come to me.
But maybe not, I'm honestly not very hopeful in this case. I have this strange
feeling that it had something to do with the dream version of the camp, but I'm
really not sure.

So the dream I remember starts with me riding in the car with Kyle and Mom on
dream 75 going dream west. When we were in the car, we were spitballing ideas
for a commerecial we were hired to make, and coming up with ideas for it. The
first thing I remember talking about, and it was Kyle who came up with the
idea, was this. He said, "What if, the premise is that Donald Trump has
purchased all of the islands, every one of them, and because of this all of the
fresh water has turned to salt, and then he becomes wholly unhappy that he has
all the islands, it turns out that it wasn't as cool as he thought it would be,
and as he is sitting there, ..." And at this point he finishes his thought, but
I don't remember how he finishes it.

At this point I say, I like that a lot, although the ending part of it wasn't
so good (which is perhaps why I can't remember what it was in my waking
moments) but I really like the premise of Donald Trump buying all of the
islands and then all of the fresh water turning to salt water because of that.
I like that premise a lot.

So we keep driving, and we get to a building. This building, it is very much
like the mall building of previous dreams, although a little different.
Actually, quite a bit different, in taht it's not in the same location, nor is
it as expansive as the dream version of the mall that I have had in the past.
But it's a sort of building with many rooms.

So I remember going in to this building, and continuing to discuss the topic of
this commercial, and as we go in, we walk in to the restroom, the three of us,
but this restroom was rather strange. It was a rather large room, similar to
how you would imagine a living room would be. The door came in not quite at the
center of the wall, but a bit to the right, and straight ahead, there were
stalls, and they came out almost in a stair step sort of pattern from the top,
so that the stalls from the center of the room were shallow, but as you went to
the right or to the left of the room, the became deeper. But they weren't quite
even, it was almost like there was some sort of reasoning to this, as if
different stalls required different toilets, and they wanted to have two of
each, so the shapes had to be fit into a puzzle just so. Something like that.

Anyway, there were probably two dozen stalls with toilts in them, and then in
the center, in between where the stalls were the narrowest, and where there was
the most open space, on the back side wall, there were two urinals. I know that
I went to one of these urinals, but my mom went into one of the stalls, and I
remember saying to her, "Why would you go to the stalls, I am sure they are
gross, and probobaly unmaintained" and this was probably true, since this
building was certainly out of service, a fact that I forget to mention is that
we were the only ones in this building. But my mom said, "Well, I don't really
have a choice, I can't really stand and pee." I wanted to object, and fathom up
ways that she could legitametely use the urinal, but I conceded, and went to
the urinal while my mom went into one of the stalls.

From here, as we were leaving, my mom then provided her comments on the whole
thing. She said, "I don't like the premise that Trump owns all of the islands,
and that the water would turn to salt. It's a good premise, but it will only
work if our client is someone like dawn or tide. But we don't know who our
client is, so it could very easily not work." I then remember thinking, "Well
yeah, we'll have to come up with something else if that premise doesn't work
for our client, but that doesn't mean it's not a good premise in it's own
right." But I kept this to myself.

So I remember going out the other way from where we came in. The way we came
in, the bathroom door was to the left, so as we left the bathroom door, we
turned left and continued down the hallway to the other end of the building,
opposite where we parked.

On the other side, I don't remember much of where the dream goes. I remember it
was similar to my dream version of the mall that used to be by our house, but
again, this was not in that location. So I don't know.

I think, it would be best if I just stopped writing about this, and moved on to
something else. I am wholly distractable right now, and would like to begin to
organize journals and things to really get on top of my Russian practice. So I
am going to do that. I will also transcribe the original, "the king and the
dragon" at some point, I have found it in my notebooks, and I want to write it
down. It is so much better than that garbage I wrote, which really goes to show
the importance of inspiration in these things. It might also have to do with
the pen and paper format over the typed format. So I will write that out later
today, but for now, I want to create some journals for Russian. 
