# 20181017
So last night I had a lot of dream fragments. The most interesting one, and the
one that I can remember right now, is this.

Eric was giving a speech in an auditorium. It was similar to the arena at TED
events. I was in the crowd watching his presentation. He went on after Joe
Rogan. Rogan had just done a comedy show, where he had included the audience.
He asked a question and some members of the audience burst out the answer.
Then, another two in the audience stood up, and started gesturing with Joe, and
actually took the mic away from him. Joe was understandably upset about this,
and said, "You know what, you can get out of here" and security came and began
to escort the first person, and then later his friend, out of the building.

After this, Eric was up. He was giving a sort of motivational speech. He was
making a point about vocabulary, and articulation. He mentioned something about
words and how you should make every word count. Then someone in the audience
said, "You mean Sentences" and Eric said, "well yeah, I suppose I mean
sentences technically". I remember thinking about this as another memeber in
the audience, (I was to the left and about 10 seats away from the girl who
yelled out) and I thought, "No, I think he did mean words there, sentences are
too broad of a sense."

Regardless, the interesting part of the dream comes up. Eric wanted to make a
point, so he goes to the back and grabs a book, that was a compilation of "To
Kill a Mockingbird" "Three Plays by Aristolipinus and Sophocles and one other"
and then I'm not sure what was at the end of the volume. Perhaps the Golden
Compass, since the compass comes up later.

So Eric says, in order to practice vocabulary and articulation, he instructs
the woman to put on a mask, so that her voice is muffled, and then he opens up
the book, and tells her to describe what she sees. I personally did not see
the image in the dream.

When he opens up the book to her, she says, "It's a compass." and that's it.
She just stops there. Eric then tries to probe her on, and says, "Is there
anything else about the compass that is noteworthy. Like, which way is it
pointing" and she says, "It's pointing everywhere, like north but also south,
or east." She then gestures with her left hand, pointing up along the direction
of the book that would be north, into east and south, and up and down through
that whole spectrum.

Eric then closes the book, and tried to recover his point. I don't remember
much past this, and the dream ends here.

A short fragment I had, I walked in to the Richardson Public Library with Cara
and someone else, because we couldn't find a book that we wanted, and Cara
walks in and says, "Ugh, I used to have to come here as a kid, this library
really sucks". She was referring to the asthetics of the place. She walked up
to the catalog, and was dreading going up to the upper floors where the book
she wanted was.

Another dream I had, I was working at Alliant. The scene was sort of like my
desk at Alliant, except it took up the entire corner. That is, the two desks
that take up the corner were combined into one bigger cube, and I was working
in that bigger cube. Also, it wasn't like Alliant, it was rather like I was a
contracter working for Blizzard on bugs and such in Hearthstone.

There were two people that wanted help. The first comes to me, and begins
asking me all of these convoluted questions. I forget what sort of questions
they were, but I remember at some point saying, "Okay, tell me what you're
trying to do, and let's work from there."

At that point, some one else comes up, and says they have an issue. They say
that one of the cases I worked on wasn't working like they wanted. They then
describe it, and they say, "The nerf you did to the Warrior's chainsaw made it
less satisfying to use." (as an aside, the "chainsaw" is most similar to the
Gorehowl weapon in irl Hearthstone) I say, "well of course, my change made it
incrementally less attack the more you use it, it will feel less satisfying
now." He says, "But we don't like that, is there any way you can make it more
satisfying," and I tell him, "No, I can't, that's not what I do, that's not
what my job is." He walks away disgruntled.
