# 20181018.md
So last night I had a couple dreams that I remember, and then some more
fragments that I don't.

The first dream, which I spoke into my phone as soon as I had it, was at a
place that I had much difficulty in describing. There was one main road, which
for the purpose of this entry went East-West. The dream started and I was
travelling East along this road. All along the right side, or South side, there
were houses. Along the left/north side, there was a strip mall. Behind me, as
far as I can perceive, there are houses going across the south side.

Eventually, as I am going on this road, there is a three way intersection.
There is a road that travels to the north, by taking a left from the way that I
was travelling on this road. This new road was rather short, was something of a
dirt and grass road, and came to a dead end rather quickly. It was simply a
sort of tributary road that was there to give access to the side of the strip
mall to the left.

To the west of this road was the strip mall. To the east of this road, a new
row of houses started, similar to the houses on the other side of the road. In
the dream, I turned left onto this new road, but if I would have kept going, I
know that the road, and the houses, would have turned to the right, going
south. I have a very hard time keeping straight which way is which cardinal
direction, but I think I have these directions to be the most correct feeling
to me.

So I get to this dirt road, and I turn onto it. I am now going north. I then
turn left into the strip mall. The last shop on the strip mall is a pizzaria. I
turn left again, and park my car on this area between the dirt road and the
strip mall.

When I get out of my car, I go to the corner. That is, the northwest corner of
the three way intersection. I need to pee, so I look around to see if there is
a good spot to pee here. When I look to my right (so to the west, since I am
facing south now) I see a construction working doing things off in the
distance. Not far in the distance, but perhaps 70 meters away. Pick a number.

I evaluate the situation. I think, he probably would not mind if I urinated
there, and he probably wouldn't contact authorities, or anything like that, but
I decided against peeing there when he was watching.

So I went around the corner, and made my way along the area between the dirt
road and the parking lot. In this area, I found a tree, I tree that was in the
way between myself and the construction man. I was about to pee, and as I was
peeing, I looked behind myself at the first house along the row there. The
house was a two story building, and I could see the front door. To the right of
the front door, there was a large window, that spanned from the ground to the
ceiling. The entire room inside was the dining room. The ceiling was probably
twenty feet tall.

I honestly don't remember if I finished peeing or not. But at this point, I was
on a mission to continue on my journey. I don't know what sort of journey I was
on, but I know that this diversion to stop and pee was a diversion, and that I
wanted to get back on the journey. I determined that my destination was towards
the north direction (I was not thinking about cardinal directions in the dream,
but the direction is what I am calling north in this article). I thought about
the surroundings, and determined that the quickest way to where I wanted to go
was directly to the north. But as I evaluated the situation, the houses along
this street were blocking the way. They were large houses, and they had very
dense bushes and trees and other foliage that was not particularly passable.

So I thought about my course of action from there. I thought that I could go
west along the road, and eventually there would be a road that intersected
North-South that I could take north, and then go east at some point from there.
But that seemed like a long time. So instead, I looked back at the house that I
had my back to when I was peeing at this tree. I looked in the window, and saw
that the lights were off. I thought, "okay, good, no one is home, I might be
able to go through this house, through a back door, and from there I could get
to where I want to go. If not, it was worth a shot anyway."

So I look, and as I am looking, I see the lights in that dining room through
the window come on, and I see a woman walk in. The woman is perhaps in her 30s
or 40s, and is the woman of the house.

At this point, I think, "Oh no, she might have seen me pee. Also this makes my
plan more difficult to pull off." Still, I was resolved to at least try this
route, and see if I couldn't find a back way through this house to my
destination.

So I walk into the front door. I want to talk a bit about the house. The house,
as I said, was two stories. Immediately upon walking in, I was on marble tile.
It was very pearly white, and the entire portrayal of the house was very white,
similar to my aunt and uncles house or granny and papa's at least in the way
that the coloring was. The ceiling was very tall, and covered in this entry way
both of the stories of the house. To the right was the dining room, the area
that I could see from the outside. The opening was about as wide as my
wingspan, and as tall as the first story ceiling, but opened up to the full
second story height after you walk through it. To the left of this opening,
still on the right, was a staircase. The stair case started going along with
the dining room, but turned to the left, so that you would enter the second
story facing the same way that you are facing when you enter the house. To the
immediate left from walking in, there is something of a living area, with some
fancy furniture surrounding a coffee table. Then, as you go past that, also on
the left, is the kitchen and breakfast table area. Lastly, straight ahead from
the front door, there is a double doorway. This double doorway leads to a sort
of secluded area of the house, similar to the room that connects to the master
bedroom of Chuck and Michelle's house.

So, after walking in to the house, I walk forward a bit. I am investigating the
house. I failed to mention, but also, there are a couple of small steps that go
down after you walk in. So from the opening to the dining area, where that
opening ends and the opening to the stairs begins, there are a couple steps
down. So you have to go to these downward steps before you can go up the stairs
to the second floor.

So I walked in to the house, and I started to investigate. I get to these
downward steps, and I think that perhaps the way to the back is through the
double doors that are in front of me. However, before I can investigate, the
woman that I saw in the window starts coming down the stairs. She meets me, and
says, in a rather irritated voice, as if she is being violated, "excuse me,
what are you doing in here?"

I am taken aback a bit by her tone, but realize rather quickly that it's
understandable, since I simply walked into her house. She probably thinks I am
some sort of theif. So I try to calm her down, I say, "I'm sorry, I was just
trying to get to a specific area here, and thought that I might be able to get
to it through your back door. If you could take me to your back door, I would
greatly appreciate it."

At this, she looked rather upset and annoyed, and said, "Look, I don't know who
you are, but you are disturbing me and my children by being here. Please leave
immediately." As she said this, she gestured toward the front door. Also, as
soon as she said this, she started going back up to second story, to attend to
her younger son.

I mentioned this in the voice recording, but there was something very oedipul
about this situation. The attending the mother was doing with her younger son
was not I think sexual in nature, but it was the sort of coddling that you
would imagine a mother having with a young infant of less that a few months
old. However, her younger son, I know, was over eight years old at least. The
mother had come down to attend to the disturbance, but only dared stayed down
long enough to tell me to leave before she went back to continue coddling her
son.

Something also to mention is that the entire time, I heard classical music from
the piano playing in the house. It was coming from the room with the double
doors. It was not refined classical music. It was like someone was practicing
classical. The practice was nice, but you could tell that it was someone that
was going through certain pieces, and working out the notes of the pieces.

So now, having been instructed to leave through the front door, the mother
walked back up the stairs. I determined to at least check through the double
doors to see if there was a back way that led to where I wanted to go. So I
opened the double doors, and inside, I saw the older son. I somehow know that
he was 14 years old. He had blonde greasy curly hair, and he was sitting at the
piano in that room, on the right side of the room. The rest of the room was
dark.

As soon as I got in, he stopped playing, and began to question me. He said,
"What are you doing here? You are inturuppting my playing."

I said, "I'm sorry, I'm just looking for a back way out of the house, it might
get me to where I want to go, do you know if there is such a thing in this
house."

The boy then got and became very obstinant. He said, "No, you shouldn't be
inturrupting my practice, if I am to become a virtuoso, I need every moment of
practice. You would best not get involved with me or my mother. Please leave
now."

I backed off and said, "whoa, sorry man, I'll see you around, I guess when you
release your albums." I was very sarcastic with this last statement.

I turned around and left through the front door. This is where the dream ended,
unfortunately.

At this point in the night, I woke up, and I had to get a drink of water and
use the restroom. I then laid back down. I woke up at 7:40, and thought, "Oh,
how nice, I'll be to work close to on time." But then I fell back asleep, and
woke up at 8:15. Another dream happened in that time.

This dream took place in my dream version of SM64. It was the first level. The
biggest thing that I remember is that I got four out of six stars. As I was
trying to get to the fifth, there was a landing area, that had a large and wide
pillar on it. From the ground to the pillar required a high jump, and from the
pillar to the hallway in the castle that led to the start required a long jump.
I had performed this many times, but I had not gotten the star. Then, on this
star, there were three people watching, one from close, and two from far. I was
doing this, but I kept getting tired, and I could tell that it was affecting my
performance. I eventually got the high jump after say four tries, (which I had
hit first try a few times previously in the dream) and then when I went to do
the long jump, I fell short, and wasn't able to grab the edge. I then saw the
people watching me, and they were mildly dissapointed.
