So last night I had a very captivating dream that I am really not sure what to
make of. It was one of the more graphic and vivid dreams I have had.

So the dream starts, and I am working at a version of Alliant that I haven't
seen before in other dreams. Actually, it might be similar to the one with the
parking garage and the back door and all of that, now that I think about it,
but it's an area of that version that I haven't been to before. It was like
there was a seperate room that was still a part of Alliant Systems, and I was
working in that area.

Anyway, as I am working, Jay comes by, and mentions that there is an active
terrorist on the loose, and that everyone should be careful. I mention that it
is probably unlikely that he is going to come and terrorize us, because we are
not likely his targets, but that I would go out and look anyway. So I go to the
cieling of the building, and I walk out, and as I look out, I determine that he
is not in our immediate vicinity, and I go back down to my desk.

Later that day, I learn that the terrorist has commited his act, and has killed
a young girl in another building. I talk with Jay about this, and we have a
breif conversation. I mention in a sort of off handed way that that is awful,
and Jay says, "Well, she knew there was a terrorist out, so she should have
known it was coming." to which I argued that we didn't take the precautions
that he was saying she should have taken, and it could have just as easily been
us, to which Jay replies, "Well yeah, we weren't as much at risk."

After a bit of time, I am done with work for the day, and as I am going down
the elevator (which just to note, I always take the stairs at work) I am met by
two people who are friends of Kyle that I know. As in, in the dream, I knew
they were friends of Kyle, but these two people were not anyone I know IRL.
Anyway, as we are going down the elevator, they mention how they now plan to
kill their friend, who was the terrorist, because the girl that he killed was
his girlfriend. We end up getting in the car and going to my parents house.

As these two are talking about killing this guy, they also argue that his
brother is involved, and they should probably kill him as well. I am sitting
back there, and I am conflicted, on the one hand, I am against what they are
saying, and don't think that this man should be killed. On the other hand, I
argue to myself that the man is a terrorist and has killed someone himself, so
their act of wanting to kill him is justified in some way. As a result of my
internal conflict, I don't add anything to this discussion, and we continue on
to my parents house.

When we get there, these two guys friend, the terrorist, and his brother, are
there. They greet like friends. When the two I was in the car with then propose
to the terroist to play super smash brothers. One of the two that was in the
car plays, while the other waits in the other room with a knife. When they play
smash, the terrorist (which is a white, teenage boy, by the way, who seems
amicable enough) chooses to play as a character which is like the ice climbers,
but has four people instead of just the two, and the other chooses to play as a
single character (I forget which one). They are doing this in the school room.
They fight, and the person from the car (I am having a hard time ID'ing these
people, so we will say that the person whose girlfriend was killed is A, his
comrade also in the car with me is B) Person A beats the terrorist. As he wins,
Person B comes in with a knife, approaches the terrorist from behind, and
slashes him twice, once in the left side of his throat, and then he twists, and
slashes to the right side. There is minimal blood, but I vividly remember
seeing the gore of the throat opening up, as well as seeing his gaze go soft.
Person B then takes the guy away. Person A then says, "God, he fought me four
on one, and still lost, what a pathetic man that was."

At this point, I continue to go along with what is happening. I am startled,
and I think that I would never be able to stab someone in the neck like that,
but he did so it's not my problem. Person A then invites the terrorists brother
to play. He also insists that I join him. So I choose a character, Jigglypuff,
but I don't want to interfere with what's happening, so I mostely stay out of
the fight. Person A and the terrorist brother also choose characetrs.

This time, we are in the middle of fighting, and Person B comes back in, comes
up behind the brother, and stabs him in the chest. AT this point, we all put
down the controllers, and Person A gets up, and helps take the body of the
brother away.

So now that their job is done, I go out of the school room, into the living
room. The dining room table is in the living room, and my dad, papa, and
others, are sitting there. I sit down, and I ask, "where are the bodies" I look
outside, and I don't see the bodies immediately, and wonder where they took
them, but then I look again, and I see them out in the backyard. I go outside,
where my dad is working to get the bodies into the corner where he is going to
bury them, and as he is carrying them, dragging them by the feet, one of them,
I think the brother, starts involuntarily gasping, and kicking at my dad.

I am greatly startled by this, and I tell either person A or B that they should
finish the job and make sure he is totally dead. One of them replies, and says
that their killing is done, now it's time to just bury the bodies and be done
with it. I'm rather horrified at the thought that the brother might have
consciousness when he is buried.

So we go to the corner, and start placing the bodies into the hole. As we do,
the one that was involuntarily kicking starts rambling about something with
soccer, saying that they don't want to go to the soccer game, or something.
Person A or B explains that they played soccer together, and that there was a
game that they were going to go to, but that they clearly didn't have to worry
about that anymore.

We go back inside, and person A and B go through the house, and out the front
door, and I stay inside.

I talk with my mom, who says something about how wrong it was. When he died,
the last thing on his mind was how he was going to play soccer with the
murderers. She is definitively possessed with this idea.

I talk with Papa then, and he asks me if I think I handled this correctly. I
say that I'm not sure if I should have stood up to the murderers to tell them
that they shouldn't murder the guys, but I do know that I should have put my
foot down and told them that they shouldn't do it in my parents house. Papa
nods, and says, "Yeah, it's awful now that this is part of our mess."

My dad was mostly just upset at having to do the extra work of digging the
holes and burying the guys.

That's mostly the extent of the dream, I wake up soon after this aftermath.
