# 20180806
So today I am writing in the afternoon, because I didn't have the urge to write
in the morning. Yesterday was an interesting day. I am not even sure where I
have journal entries, and where I don't anymore. I was working a bit on the
journal, and then on the Dragon story, when something quite crazy happened. I
became addicted to a game again. Here is the story.

So I was working on the journal yesterday, working on it as I do, and I got to
a point where I decided I wanted to take a little break. I was drinking some
coffee, as one does, and I wanted to take a break. So I pulled up a game that I
got a few weeks ago. The best way to describe this game is that it is as card
drafting rogue like. So you start with a simple deck, and then you defeat
monsters and encounter shops and so on as you "climb the levels" and you get to
the boss of the act, and you defeat the boss. It's a really cool little game.
Well, the first time I played it, I played for maybe an hour or so, and I
remember thinking at the time (this was maybe a month ago), "this is a fun
little game" but I didn't think much more of it. Well, yesterday, when I had
finished my coffee, and I started playing this game, I became hooked. There are
three different characters that you can play as, and each one has their own set
of cards and each one has it's own mechanic, (actually, I think it is just the
mage that has it's own mechanic, but still) and last time I played it I did not
get very far as any character and I just sort of put it down and that was it.
Well, I played as the mage character for the first time yesterday, and the
mechanics of the mage were so much fun, that I could not stop playing. I
started to get an idea of what cards were good, what cards were bad, I started
playing with synergies, and things of that nature, and I was really getting
involved in everything that was going on there, that I got so entranced, that
eventually I realized that it was becoming dark outside and when I went into
the kitchen to decide to grab some food, it was well into the 9:30 range. I
made some food, but I was still playing the game as I was eating and cooking
some salmon, so even then, I was still hooked. And I kept playing, and I ended
up completing the story with all three characters. All three of them. I had
maybe twenty runs, and the runs, each one takes anywhere from twenty minutes to
an hour, so you do the math there. The play time on steam said something like
fourteen hours after I was done. So that means I was essentially playing for
twelve hours straight.

So now the question is this. What is that? I was wholly determined to read
some, to write some, to work on my Russian, to work on my side project. I
wanted to do all of these things, but it didn't happen. Instead, I got involved
with this game, and that became the thing I did for those twelve hours.

So what is it that made me want to get better at that game? What is this an
indication of? Is this an indication that I am spinning my wheels at these
other things, and I needed something to feel like I was making progress? I
think that hits the closest to what could have been going on. But I certainly
felt that I was spinning my wheels sometimes with the game as well. Maybe it
has to do with the ability to accurately measure how well you do. I got to a
point, and that was how well I did for that run. So maybe I don't have the same
sense of progress as I do with other things. I'm not sure.

I had a similar sort of experience just a couple hours ago. After our Monday
meeting, (today is Monday) I got in my car and started going to BJJ. It's open
mat day, and as I was going, I remembered that there is construction on
Macarthur, and I remembered how on Friday, I spent a good twenty minutes more
actually getting to the gym, so today, I decided I would "take a shortcut" to
go around the gym. This shortcut I took the other way on Friday, that is, on
the way from the gym back to work, I took a different way, and it
curcumnavigated the issue, so that I didn't have to drive through the
construction. So the thing is, I knew that this other way involved some weaving
of access roads with the highways that are around there, but I thought that I
could find my way going the other direction. So I began to take this shortcut,
and as I did it, I started going in the direction where I thought all I needed
to do was take a left and I would be on the way to the gym, but the direction
to the left, it didn't look familiar. So at this point, I got out my phone, and
realized that, in the whole mess of interchange between 161 and 635, I had
taken a route that led me along the eastern side of 161 and not the western
side that I needed to be on. I then continued looking at my phone, and saw that
I was quite a few miles off, and that it would take me a good amount of time to
go around.

At this point, I remember having a moment, where I told myself, "I'm only going
to get what, three rounds in. By the time I get to the gym, put on my gi,
incorperate myself into the rounds, and do the whole thing, I won't get very
many rounds in. I felt myself too, though, and I knew I was feeling that sort
of anxious feeling that I feel when I haven't done anything active in a while.
As I said, I spent most of yesterday jacked up on coffee and playing this game,
and I was feeling the physical effects of my body starting to give in to
itself. So I knew I had to do something physical. So I remember thinking at
that point something like, "How about I just go to my apartment, and do some
light sprinting." But then I continued to think about it, and this seemed just
as absurd as going to the gym. So I knew at that point that it had to do with
something I was avoiding. I don't know what it is I was avoiding, but I knew I
was certainly avoiding something.

Well, I ended up turning onto macarthur from the other way, and by the time I
got to the point where I had to turn left to get to the gym, I remember
thinking, "Am I going on not" and I also remember thinking, "This would be so
unnattractive to any potential mate, if this were being recorded and someone
could see it, it's actually repulsive what I am doing right now." I did not
dwell on that chain of thought very long, but it was something else that I
thought about as I was driving along there.

So I miss the left, intentionally, and I continue driving the other way through
the construction. And as I drove up, there was a point where there was a
construction vehicle that was pulling out into the road, so we were all stopped
there, and we were going dreadfully slow. That, on top of the lights that were
going on there and the general sort of mayhem that goes on when there is
construction that takes up two out of three lanes and everyone is funneled into
directions that they don't want to go in, made the going very slow through this
level of construction as well. I saw some people there begin to take a U turn
there, as an attempt to get out of the construction, and find an alternate
route. At least, that is what I assume they were takeing the U turn for, I
don't believe they meant to take a U turn there as a part of their normal
route. Well, I saw people taking this U turn, and I decided that I was going to
take it as well, and when I did, I was approaching the entry to the gym from
the direction I normally enter it from. Almost as if out of habit or just
instinct, I just turned in. And after I turned in, I found myself parking
there.

Even at this point, I was still considering not going in. I was still to the
point where I thought, "I can just drive through here, I don't have to go in."
I thought about it, but then I thought, "Actually, I know that the people here
sometimes see cars drive by on the outside, and well, they might have seen me
drive by here, and how strange would be if I drove up and went through the
parking lot and then just drove off." So at that point, I decided to park, and
I made my way in.

As I parked, and I started grabbing my things, I made my way in, and I remember
having that little pep talk that you have with yourself when you find yourself
in these sorts of situations. "Okay Brett, you're being weird about this for
some reason, but it's just you that's weird." I also remember thinking
something like, "What if someone asks about why I was late" and I remember
thinking that I could come up with an excuse about work or something, but then
I remember thinking, "No, just say the truth, you tried to take a way around
the construction, but it turns out that I didn't know the way around, and
instead it took me way around, way more than I thought." And that was my plan
if anyone asked me where I had been or where I was.

Well, no one asked me, and instead, after I got in my Gi and made it to the
mats, I just sort of hopped right in. I actually watched, as Chris and David
played a little bit. Then when that round was over, David actually came over to
me, and he and I rolled a bit. After that round was over, everyone else was
still pretty much doing their own thing, and so David and I decided to go for
another round.

Rolling with David is interesting. I don't really understand it. He very easily
concedes position. I always end up on his back. I think he does it on purpose,
but I'm not sure what the thing is. I don't fully understand it. Regardless, I
have always ended up on his back, but I have never been able to submit him from
there, or from anywhere. Well, today, first I went after a head and arm
triangle, and that was actually really close, but he had a good half gaurd
lockdown which was pulling me away from finishing the sub. Eventually I lost
the submission attempt, but I maintained position, and we ended up on the back.
That was the first round. The second round ended up on the back sooner, and we
got to the back, and I was able to get a good grip under him on the lapel. I
had the bow and arrow grip, and I knew I had it, it was there, and I knew all I
had to do was finish it. Well, I started out trying to do it the Chris Nelson
way of placing the knee under the neck on the underside, but he was aware that
that was what I was trying to do, and I could tell he was trying to barrel roll
out of it. So at that point, I transitioned to a more stanard finish, of
hooking the legs with the free, non lapel hand, and as soon as I did that, I
knew it was sunk. It's one of those things where you know it's in. You know
it's in, and when it's in, it's undeniable. He tapped pretty soon after. I made
a comment like, "That's one to mark on the calender." And I said that because,
David and I always end up in that position, and I am never able to finish him
from there at all. We had a good laugh about it, and that was that.

I then went on to roll with Colin. We started, and I ended up in his closed
gaurd, but I was in combat base, as I do, and I was trying to pry my way
through his gaurd. Well, he ended up sweeping, so we ended up playing some from
half guard a bit. Eventually, as I was trying to get an underhook, he managed
to really capture that underhook himself, and he really maintained. Eventually,
I started to realize that he was very commited to that underhook, and I was
actually able to trap and and roll ourselves over. I felt it, it was so
natural. So from top half gaurd, I remember going to that same head and arm
triangle from David's first roll. I went to that position, with the head dug in
under the arm. And here, at this point, I am near certain that Colin gave me
the position. I am certain he did. His arm went over my head too easily, or
rather, my head went into his armpit too easily, and I had the position. He
started doing similar things as David with the lockdown, but Colin I was able
wiggle out to side mount. From there, I was able to trap his other arm in my
hip, and put myself really high on him in side mount, while maintaining my
balance, and from there, I made a lot of space between my hip and his knee, the
knee that you use to from the bottom of side mount to block the guy from going
to mount. With that space, I was able to go into mount. From there, he did a
very good job (he is a black belt after all) stepping on my feet and preventing
me from continuing over to the other side, but with enough patience, I was able
to maneuver in a way to free that as well. He was answering the phone the whole
time as the defense, and he was doing a good job of it. I thought about
transitioning to the wrist lock from there that he has showed us, but when I
ventured towards that direction, it wasn't tight, and I was afraid of losing
the position. I also thought about that mean fist in the throat ezekial that
you can do from there as well, but I did'nt see that opportunity. Well,
eventually, I was able to keep digging under, digging under and under and under
more and more, and twisting and digging, and digging and twisting, and
eventually I was able to make enough space to windshield wiper my leg to the
correct side of side mount, and from there I was able to block his body and
turn myself to him. And eventually I heard from his voice a faint, "tap" and I
was confused at first, but I knew what it was and I let it go. As soon as I let
it go and saw his face, I could tell that I had it in. I heard his breathing
when I was twisting and digging, but looking at his face I could tell that I
had a full blood choke, honest to god blood choke.

So yeah, all of that to say, I'm not sure what this is. I don't know what to
make of myself right now. I have these strange tendencies to avoid things, and
they are non-conscious in their ways. I'm not sure what it is. I avoided
writing, and I avoided my projects, and I avoided reading, and everything,
yesterday, with my compulsive behavior with this new game. And I was about to
avoid BJJ today, and do something totally different. I don't understand it. I
really wish I did, but I don't. I don't understand why I have such a strong
resistance to these things.

Part of me wonders if maybe it really does have something to do with diet. It
very easily might. I'm not sure. That would be interesting.

Something I have decided whole heartedly though is that I will never play video
games again when I decide to drink coffee. If I decide I want to waste a day, I
will do so without the use of coffee to make it that much more wasteful.

I think it does have something to do with the effects of coffee on the
neurotransmiters. That certainly has something to do with things. I think, the
brain chemistry you feel when playing a game, that surge of contiual dopamine
hits, especially when you are getting better at the game, it gives you
something, and well, coffee only made it more magnified.

Something I find very interesting is that, when children are watching
something, and a parent takes it away, they will scream. So I think these
receptors, I think they are a thing that we don't feel when they happen with us
(although in the case of orgasm that is certainly not the case) but when they
are taken away, we feel much more strongly their abscence. It's the absence of
those feelings, those urges, that absence is what is beautiful. It really is.
Children can't handle that sort of beauty. I can't handle that sort of beauty
it seems. I can only handle it for so much, until I have to return to it's
absence. That's an interesting notion. I think that it is so beautiful that we
can't handle it, and because it is not the path of least resitance, I think
that people as a whole, they can't handle it.

It's like when I have conversations with someone, and they tell me, "That's too
deep for me." It's always women who say such things. "That's too deep for me."
Now that I think about it, I have never had a guy say such a thing. These
discussions are discussions. There must be something fundamental there that I
don't understand. It's too deep for women. And that is to say more about the
silliness of men then it is to say anything about women. But what does that
indicate? I really don't know.

Still, I think this all has something to do with my pursuits. I know my
pursuits are meaningful, and there is so much meaning in them that I can't
handle it, and my brain, my body, they are not ready for it. That beauty, it's
so difficult.

Is that a fundamental aspect of it? Why is it that the body resists that sort
of beauty, that sort of truth? If it really is the truth, why is something
other than the truth easier for the body to handle? That's such an interesting
question. It's undeniable that the truth is difficult. But that is counter
intuitive. It seems as if the truth should be easy. And that, if in one way, I
were to be finding results, it would only make sense that the body would
continue along that path. But that's not how it works. The body does not
continue along that path. The calm sage must work to find stillness. It's the
fundamental paradox of meditation, and it's the fundamental paradox of truth.
In order to get the results you are looking for, you have to let go of the
desire for results. But if you let go of the desire for results, and you begin
to get the results that you were looking for, then the desire for those results
will return.

This is the paradox of meditation, but I feel like a similar principle
neccesarily applies here. I just don't understand it. I don't understand at
all.

There must be a something Freudian at work here. I will continue to read Freud
and attempt to understand his works. There must be something repressed in me,
something even beyond what I think I understand about myself. There is so much
about myself that I think I understand, but really I have no clue, no clue at
all. That's interesting. This is the first time that I have seen myself as only
scratching the surface of my own psyche. If you would have asked me at some
points of my life if I thought I knew myself, I might have said yes, that I
have gone deep. I never would have said that I have known everything about
myself, but there were certainly times that I knew quite a lot about myself.
This is the first time, I think, where I have almost seen myself in quite a
different way. It scares me. What could I find? What is it that I am hiding
from myself? What am I scared of, not about myself, but about the world? I am
certainly scared, but of what?

I am certainly scared of my tendency to fall into addiction. But for instance,
why did I avoid rotating laundry last night. After I decided to try and get
myself to sleep, I avoided rotating laundry. I was in my kitchen, looking at
the door, and all of the laundry was in the dryer, waiting to be rotated, and I
decided that I wasn't going to do it. Why is it that I will avoid that task,
why does that task seem difficult or daunting, when the task of understand a
new card drafting game and trying and failing and continually improving at it,
when I will do something like that for twelve hours straight, but when it comes
to the task of taking out the laundry from the dryer and placing it into
different bins, that task feels difficult and annoying. Is not failing at a
game and trying again more annoying? Especially when the part leading up to the
point where you fail is monotonous or boring. Why is it that I will pursue
those sorts of things, but I won't do something as simple as rotating the
laundry?

And these are the sorts of questions where it seems as though there should be a
simple answer. Part of the answer could be because I have a hidden desired to
not rotate the laundry, so that I won't have clothes to wear to work, because I
don't like my work. But then that gets into the question of work. And maybe
that has something to do with it, but I am still not convinced. What is it
about doing the laundry that is so taxing, and difficult? I literally just dump
clothes from a bin into a machine and push go. Why is that difficult. Or
similar to this is taking out the trash. Why will I let the bin come up to
nearly overflowing before I decide to do anything about it?

There must be something deep at work here. I will have to come to understand
this at some point. For now, I don't understand at all. But I will get there. I
will. There might be something in Freud. I will continue to read Freud, and see
if anything resonates with me.
