# 20180705 Reflections of yestday, Peterson, then Michelle
So at this point, I want to cut off my ever haughty and pompous talk of "the
otherworld" to return to the disscussion of things more appropiate for a
journal entry. In fact, to say I am cutting it off is maybe inappropiate, that
is what should be done with journal entries like this, I think, and if at some
point I wish to continue than I will. Well, enough of that.

Last night I know I had a dream, and I know it involved my hair in some way,
but I don't remember it very clearly and am quite honestly not concerned with
it. Instead, I want to talk about the conversation I had with Michelle
yesterday.

So yesterday was a sort of interesting day for me. It started with my waking
up, hoping that I had slept through yoga (I think I wrote about this already)
but when I had realized I hadn't, instead of deciding to sleep through it I
decided I would do the responsible thing and cancel my appointment
(appointment?) for the class that day. So after doing that, I wrote about my
dream, and then I followed that up by listening to the podcast between Rogan
and Peterson. You see, I was feeling in one of my depressive moods that day,
feeling like "all of this is pointless" but at the same time know that that was
just my depressive self talking, and I thought about what I would do, so I
decided to listen to the podcast, and it was exactly what I needed I think. And
it wasn't exactly what I needed in terms of "oh it turned my life around"
because that's not what I think this is about, but instead it was just a gentle
reminder to me that these things happen, and that I should ride it out and make
the best of it. In the podcast, Peterson talked about the concept of setting
the bar substancially low enough to be able to reach it, and that is something
that in these moments of depression I tend to forget, and I always set the bar
just a little too high, and I decide it would be better to do nothing than to
fail to reach that bar, so as I was listening, I started to do some of my
dishes which had been piling up, and I rearranged my living area a bit so that
I could vacuum it and make it a little more "fresh" like I like to do at times,
and as I listened to the podcast I started to practice one of Chopin's etude,
the C# minor one that I kind of know, and in general, while it didn't do much
in the way of helping me "find my purpose" or anything so silly like that,
those little things really do go a long way to helping out when I get in that
mood. And the fact that yesterday was a day off, and I had all the time in the
world to do these little things helped. You see, this is something that I have
noticed before, but when you only have a short ammount of time to do these
little tasks, they feel rushed and almost painful in a way, but when I was able
to spend as much time I wanted cleaning the dishes, I was able to really just
do them as I felt. In fact, what I ended up doing was first collecting all of
the dishes, and placing them next to the sink, and once I had a sort of catalog
of all the dirty dishes that were there, and I had enough time to evaluate
honestly that this was the full of the catalog (as opposed to shoving some
dishes off to the side or into some obscure corner of the kitchen as I
sometimes do when I am dishonest about it), I was able to then take each dish
one at a time, and determine the best method of cleaning it. So some of the
silverware simply required a quick rinse and squeeze of the sponge, and after
evaluating each piece and holding it up to the light I determined that it was
quite clean in the first place and didn't need any more fine detail work, but
when I got to my quart sized plastic cups, I did a full pat down of them inside
and out, and determined that some of them had quite a bit of leftover milky
residue on them and in them, so after determining this, I was able to take my
sponge, and fill them with a bit of water, and thouroughly wash through them,
scrubbing every little corner and edge with maticulous precision, as I took
each one and determined quite satisfactorily that I had cleaned it quite
thouroughly, and taking each cup in this way, I would set them to the side to
be dried. And as I took the towel that I use to dry them, I determined that
they were not becoming as dry as I might like, so instead of putting them in
the pantry still partially wet like I do sometimes, I decided to pull out a new
towel from my drawer of towels, and see if that new towel would make them any
more dry than the one I know I haven't washed in at least a few weeks. And as
it turns out, the new towel did indeed make them quite a bit more dry than the
unclean one, so I put the unclean towel in the washing machine, with the other
dirty laundry that I wanted to get to after this, and I began using the new
towel. I then proceeded to do this with the other towel in my kitchen, so I
replaced both of them. Then, when everything was dry and put in it's proper
place, I proceeded to go into the refridgerator and throw out a couple of items
that I knew had been in there a while, and that I had been neglecting to throw
away. There were some sausage and eggs leftover from I honestly don't know how
long ago when I visited my parents and made some sausage and eggs and they
weren't received by anyone there to have for breakfast, so I took them home and
I know I ate them each once after that, but they had become quite moldy and
such, so I emptied the contents into the trash bag that I had set next to the
door to take out, and cleaned the containers and placed them in my cabinet in
the containers. To be entirely honest, I do not know how long all of this took
me, but I was listening to the Peterson podcast all the while and taking as
much time as I wanted to do each of these small little tasks, and by the end of
it I took a portabello cap and spread some avocado on it, and sat down in the
chair next to my speakers and continued to listen to the podcast while eating
my noontime snack that I have been having since I started experimenting with
intermettant fasting. And after I was finished, I continued to sit there, and I
did nothing more, until I arrived in my bathroom to take a piss, and I saw my
pipe sitting in a ziploc bag filled with salt and alcohol, and I know that it
has been sitting there for at least a week by this point, so I emptied the
contents of the bag into the toilet, and thouroughly washed through the pipe
with water, and took it out and left it to dry there sparkling as clean as new.
I then brought myself into the shower, and rinsed myself off for a bit, brushed
my teeth after drying myself, and at around this point I sat down and worked a
bit on my Russian trainer. I am not at all satisfied with how it turned out,
and indeed I knew that it wouldn't be what I wanted it to be from the get go,
but it was not at all satisfactory at all, but that is a topic for another day.
At this point, I decided to lie down and take a quick nap. It was two o'clock,
the time when I wish at work that I could take an afternoon nap but am never
allowed to (I have been absconded in the past for taking naps, so instead now I
simply sit and stare at my desk for about an hour when I wish I could simply
crawl under my desk for twenty minutes instead, so whatever) and I determined
to take a good 20 minute nap.

Well, when I woke up I checked the time and determined it to be two entire REM
cycles later at five o'clock. I was of course surprised at this, as I had not
intended to hit even one REM cycle, and I swore at myself for a moment before
deciding that it was okay. All this time through the day, I had been checking
my phone a few times to see if I was getting any messages from anyone, and I
had not been, so I got up and proceeded to do not much of anything productive
for the next hour or so. Indeed, it was six o'clock when I decided to make a
sandwich, and as I was making a sandwich, I heard my phone vibrate on the
counter, and I checked it and found that it was Michelle texting me and my
brothers, asking if we wanted to go out for food. I replied that "Yeah, I would
like that" right as Kyle replied that he was chilling at the hospital, and
after some interaction, I decided to continue making my half made sandwich and
eat it because I needed to eat a lot of food anyway, before I decided to make
the decision to meet at twisted root. The plan then being to wait for Kyle to
text when he was leaving, I immediately went outside even as we were still
making plans, and placed my phone next to my marker for the beginning of my
running distances, and began running back and forth, keeping strong control of
my breath as I started at 6-2 In-Out breathing pace, and sped to 4-2 and
sometimes 3-2 or 3-1 pace occasionally, but staying at a pretty steady 4-2
pace. I jogged back and forth for two miles this way, intending to only run a
mile at first but extending my length first by a half a mile when I reach a
mile, and then another half mile when I reached 1.5, and when I finished I
picked up my phone and saw two missed calls from Kyle. I immediately called him
back to talk with him. Apparently, he had something in mind, a greek place that
was more centrallized, and I said if he wanted to mention that he wanted to go
there instead, we could, and that I really had no desire to go to Twisted Root
beyond the simple fact that Michelle mentioned burgers and I wanted to come to
a decision sooner rather than later. Regardless, I took my shower, and a few
minutes after that I got the text and made my way to Twisted Root.

Upon getting there, I met Michelle and Evan, and Kyle converged about the same
time, and we ordered and began talking about things. We had a very pleasent
conversation, the four of us, but I realized that I tended to dominate most of
the conversation, indeed, Kyle did talk a little, and Evan talked very little
at all like he usually does, and thinking back on the conversation now, I spoke
for most of it. Although, that is not entirely true, as the most pleasent part
of the conversation was my inquiring of Michelle about how her and Chuck met,
and how their relationship evolved, so I was not entirely selfish in the
conversation. Regardless, we talked a bit about our dad, as we all agreed that
we were (or at least I said this and everyone tended to at least understand
completly) more concerned for my mom than we were for my dad, as she is being
very almost possessive of him, not wanting to accept help from others and not
knowing how to accept help from others. After talking a bit about that, we
transitioned to the typical "how is work going" conversation, to which Kyle and
I gave our accounts of our job and Evan remained quiet in his corner as he
always does. Then after we talked about that a little bit, Michelle talked a
bit about how she is "weddinged out" for the time being, as she mention Jaq and
then her sister Steph, both having weddings recently, and then we went to the
true heart of the conversation and what I truly enjoyed about it, which was her
inquiry of our relationship status. And this is where the conversation really
took place, where we talked a little bit about Jess's relationship with her new
boyfriend, before talking about how our relationship status today. And this is
when the conversation led to the topic of Michelle meeting Chuck, and how that
happened. To give a quick recount of how she told it, Michelle mentioned that
in school, she had a few groups of friends (as most people do), and how there
were three guys that she was good friends with, who she would hang out with on
the reg, and another group of three roommates that those roommates were friends
with, that she knew of but didn't know very well. And so she mentioned one
time, when they were all hanging out, Chuck was there, and she had known him
before but never interacted with him, and interacting with him and everyone
there, she came to a liking for him. And after that she mentioned to her
friends of the first group that she did take a liking to him, and those friends
were very much interested in playing wingman for her, and were receptive to it,
but she also talked about how she was so brutally scared of mentioning it
because she didn't want to be that girl that hangs out with a bunch of guys and
then becomes involved with one of them in a sort of fling, and she knew how
they talked and how she would be crucified if she fucked it up, but she had to
chase him a bit. And then she said, after she had expressed her liking of him,
and she knew that he knew it, how he continued to give her the cold shoulder,
to play hard to get in a way. She saw him, and he would see her, going to and
from classes and to and from the bus or the parking lot, and they might make
eye contact, but he would ignore her, and it got to a point where after a few
weeks of this, with them hanging out with their group of mutual friends and
still being of course amicable with eachother, she talked about how she almost
got the point of saying, "well to hell with him then" but they ended up going
on a date, and from there the rest is history as they say. She talked about
this with a great glow in her eyes, of her early relationship with Chuck, you
could see the love and the passion. We then took this conversation to go into
the concept of dating, and not dating in the sense of "this date should be
considered as the prospective one" but instead in the sense of "this is
practice dating" and while I very much agree, we talked then about the
difficulty that guys have now in finding a date. We also mentioned (I also
mentioned) that our mom was very much opposed to the idea of us interacting
with girls in any way, especially not in a romantic way, through even high
school, and how because of that we really missed out on a lot of the young love
dating that a lot of people go through, and that I would very much like to get
into this practice dating. I also mentioned, as I have mentioned to other
before though, how I don't know what avenue I want to use in order to get into
this world of practice dating, and after talking with Michelle, she mentioned
how she knows that Jaq has quite a lot of friends, and that while she herself
has to put great effort into interacting with others, she feels that it simply
comes naturally to Jaq, and that she would put Jaq on it. We then talked about
the camp, and now the ranch (which I have yet to visit) and the whole takeaway
of the entire conversation to me was, I will plan to visit the camp this Fourth
of July weekend just to interact with everyone there. In particular, I want to
get into fishing and hunting and all of those sorts of "outdoorsy" things, and
I want to get involved with Parker, as Parker seems like a good guy to know
when it comes to these things, so the bottom line of my conversation with
Michelle is, I want to make an effort to connect with Parker with the purpose
of both getting more involved with outdoors things and also to increase my
friend circle. As Yash told me, I should meet 10% more people every month, so
this I feel is my best effort to do that.


