So last night I had a long and convoluted dream, but I don't feel like going
into depth on it right now, so I'll try and summarize the best I can.

So I was to meet Austin Walker for some sort of gathering at his parents place
at five o'clock, so I got off of work, and went over there. When I got there,
it was just mama Walker (as she is called) and there was a piano there. I
started playing on the piano. I was playing something from Kefka or Brahms, or
something. Eventually, mama walker became interested, and eventually I realized
that it was actually 1 o'clock, and that I was really early. I also thought
about work, and thought it would be okay to just play it off as a long lunch.

As I left that room, I went back through the Walker's house, and it was a very
large and fancy house, with lots of antiques and things sitting around. There
were also some girls sitting on the couch, and they were talking. I walked past
them, and I remember seeing something like a large ruby in a corner.

The dream went on to a big room that was like a large dining area with maybe
fifty tables. I was at one of them. It was announced that the "federation" (or
something similarly named) was going to take over, and that we needed to be
admitted.

The justification for it was given by a clip from monsters Inc, and the
monsters on the clip were mulit eyed (like five to seven eyes) and they were
friendly enough. But the clip described how we were to be admitted and placed
in containment, and asked upon at the whim of the federation.

I was escorted by a cute red-headed girl to a series of machines that would
cycle us through the admittion process. I remember encountering other people at
these machines, and they were scared or apprehensive of them, but I sort of
scoffed at them. I even remember going back to another machine, and making some
comment like, "These machines are so dumb."

When we made it to the end, I asked my attendent if there was any chance of
becoming a federation worker instead of the sort of slave they were making us
(slave isn't quite the right word, subordinate might be better) and she said
that no, it wasn't possible. I was felt deflated for two reasons, first because
I didn't like the prospect of being subbordinate, and two because it meant that
whatever chance of asking this girl out was out the window. I thought, she
probably gets that kind of thing all the time, and I don't want to be that guy.

So we go back into another building now, and this building has all sorts of
books and such. It might have been here that there was the monsters inc scene,
actually. But I remember going through all of the books, and thinking "this is
how they keep us satiated." And I also remember trying to find a way to get out
of there, and it looked like the bookshelves and everything wound their way out
to where the federation was.

I could go into detail with these dreams, but it seems that this dream is
really hard to get out for whatever reason. But I got mostly everything that
goes on.
