# 20180829
So last night I had some sort of dream, but it was very strange, certainly
dream fragments more than an actual dream. The dream was essentially a giant
sheet of smooth surface, like ice, but not slippery or cold, but just smooth.
In this surface, there were holes. I remember going into the holes, and when I
did, I would wake up, and check the time, and go back to sleep.

I feel like there was more to these holes, but I don't remember what. Well,
they certainly represent the holes that I have in my life, and the sort of
jumping into them and exploring them, I remember, when I would do this, I would
become something of a suspended consciousness, and I would sort through
networks and graphs and lists and things of that nature, and I was doing my
best to make sense of it and sort them out, but I was more trying to understand
these things rather than alter them in any way. I then remember, though, before
I woke up for the last time, I threw some dynamite into one of the holes, and I
yelled, dynamite in the hole! and before it went off, I said, "OH, so that's
where that expression comes from." As if I didn't understand where that
expression came from. But when the dynamite exploded is when I woke up, and I
checked the time, and it was six.

Last night, and this morning were the first days that I have been able to go
back to BJJ. And I must say, it was nice to get back at it again. Last night we
went over the flower sweep, and we talked about some arm bars and other things
that can occur from there if the sweep fails, and then we did some rolling.

I must say, I am quite surprised how out of practice I felt after only two
weeks off. It was quite amazing. At the same time, though, my body felt a lot
better. So it's one of those things where the time off was good, but I have to
take care in not doing it again.

I have some things I might want to say about BJJ, and Collin, and CTA, but I
really don't feel like writing them out right now, and well, going back to the
class I must say that a lot of them are quelled to an extent. Well, somewhat.
Not entierly but still.

So I am not sure what I want to talk about. I really don't have much
inclination to talk about anything right now. I actually have an inclination to
read more of the possessed, and make some commentary on it, than I do to write.
I might do just that, and come back and write when I have more to write about.

I really don't know where the day went. After I went for a jog, I came back,
and I had things that I wanted to write about, but then I didn't, and now it's
late and testing night, and I probably just won't write very much today. It's
sad, but it's the truth. I might write when I get back this evening, although
eating something better than pei wei and going to bed sounds better. We'll see.
