So this is something that I like to do occasionally, I just write for as long
as I would like to write and I don't stop. I'm not even reading what it is that
I am writing, I am just closing my eyes and writing into the machine. It's
totoally possible that I am writting into the machine in something that doesn't
make any sense as a sencence, but I think that this is okay, because it allaws
me to get into a sort of warm up  for being able to write as much as I would
like to write. I want my consciousness to sort of just flow out of the fingers
and onto the keyboard / other thing the machine the computer, and I just want
it all to come uout naturally without any dinterurpputiong from the thoughts of
correcting or altering what I have to say because it is incororrector or
anything like that. I mostly just want to be able to get to a speed where I am
writing words and I don't have have yidaea whan sort of correctness there is to
them, they are just waords and they come out and I have nothing to do with teh
speed or teh accuratcy wwhith which the come out of the fingers. It's really
quite freeing to thingk that I don't have tocrorrect shit wwhen I write in the
way, I can just wriete out oeverything that comevs into my head, and it just
comes out in a sort of quasi correct and quisi readable form, and no one knowns
the difference so that is finun.

I have been bplaying some traccraft 2, and it's incteresting, because I have
gootten to the point where wI feel I am gains ing some of the fundamentals of
rthe game. Howewver, I am noti netrestied in the game for the reason that I
really hate the chooesees, aond edfenidng cheesis in the game is not a fund
thingk. IIt would b elike in chess, if the trikey four move checkmate where a
common and even recommended startegey, I appericeaate that something like that
is in the cgame of chosee, but it's not what jchess ins about , and it
shouldn't be what starcraft is about. I do want to say thought thtat I think it
is possible to get to gM in sc2 by plaiying an honset game, it's just that,
well, it seems like by playing an honest game, you really have to play against
people who insist on doing all of these crazy shit, and when that happpens, it
becmoes a different game. I do want to say that there is something that is
quite cool about playing the game without the urge to chees or do anything like
that , itas something about sometihng and I don't know where my thoughts are
going now, it's really something and there is noise here where I d'nte have
thougts. Bacsiclally what I am saying is that something is somtehing and thotat
there is something else in the something else, and I don't really want to talk
too much about scracreaft,. Something that gets' ms me is that I have to toake
a break after I win a game of stracreft, I think with weed that wouldn't be an
issue, but when I win some sc2, espceicially musmlitpyle games in a row, I have
this strong inclinatino to stop, an. It's stressful, I think, is part of it,
and really its' ssomething. But plpaing a bamcro style is so good. I love
having sixiteen gateways, wihth three robobs and some starports and when a big
fight haoppens, even if it is a bad fight, my micro and lack there of can be
maede up for in the fact that i can remake my entire army and ahve some more
units ready to go, and these new units will be able to break whatever it is
that the opponinent sis doing , so it's not an usisue to have this som much
thstuff going on. It's lreally a good way to play. The problem is whin I get
all ined , it's a huge deal, and I don't know what to do with it. I don'nt know
haw to handle it. Everytime I get all ined, I die, even if I think I know what
I am doing. I need to get better at throwing bateries I think, and placing
fefense in the way. But if I expamnd fanst, as I do, then getting all inned is
a struggle at protecting the natural.

I like playing against zerg, because the early ling pressure can be stopped by
placing buildings at teh ramp of th enatural, and when that happens, you place
a unit ther iwih hold psosition, and they can't get past the thing taht you are
doing, so then it can go into a late game rather organically, and zergs always
go into late game, and when I have more units them tthem I wusulally win. There
was on egome a I played wehre osmeeone with mutas and a roach army was able to
attack in multilpele places, and I wasn't able to dfefned and it was quite
awful, but that guy I think was dimaned level, and I had the problem that I
didn't place enough statci d at the rogight point, and he even quit after he
did this stuff, and I wan tohat game, even though I dshouldn't have, but that
was a gacase where I think that the poerson was actually a pretty good playier
and his bmarcor game was on point and he knowe what eh was doing so I was not
aboule to fight him aor anything there.

I am done typing like this, it is awful, and I like to take breaks and stuff

Okay, we're back, and I want to talk about something of a revelation that I
just had when I was on my way to practice BJJ. I have already had the sort of
revelation that the notion of God coincides with the evolution of
consciousness, and the birth of modern civilization. The revelation that I had
was the idea that the dream, or in other words, the way in which the revelation
of God was revealed to us, might also be something of an evolutionary
phenomenon, and that this phenomenon, which cooresponds to the development of
the idea of god (it's how we were able to come up with something like god), was
a sort of evolutionary phenomenon, and it's an extremely vital tool for species
like us to be able to reason about and work with the world as we know it. In
other words, the dream, and the capability to have dreams and revelations, it
seems to me, would be the basis on which we were able to evolve, and it's a
vital part of our being, and a part of it that works towards our evolutionary
success.

Now, the question then becomes, in what way is dreaming a part of reality? In
other words, and this was somethnig of a concurrent revelation, in what way is
it important to define something as real?

Now this I think is where I am getting stuck on something. I have this idea
that reality should be thought of as something that is real, but I think that
this idea is perhaps the wrong way to go about it. In other words, I think it's
wrong to think that there is a reality. I do not think my stance is that there
is such a thing as an absolute truth, and that

Okay, so this journal is all over the place. I have stopped and started a few
times now, and I want to say something about how I think.

If truth is a maiden, the Maiden of Truth as the artist in me would like to put
it, then Christianity is the young boy that enters the cave of the maiden,
takes her for his own, and proceeds to rape and defile her until she is
helpless to do anything against her. He forces himself upon her, hides her and
keeps her for himself, and anyone who might oppose him and his ways he puts on
the front for and charms or thwarts or in many cases kills them until he can
proceed to continue raping her.

In fact, I think this is not far from the truth. The maiden lies dormant, in
her cave, and very few are able to even get glimpses of her. She is the source
of everything in this world, she created it. But she does not give herself to
any, she does not do this because she chooses. What is her backstory? I must
call upon my muse to find it, but she is not coming to me. I must reflect on
this.

Regardless, the young fisherman stumbled upon the cave, and found the maiden.
The maiden, when questioned, told him to leave, because he did not belong
there. So he left. But he was so captivated by her beauty, and her charm, that
he felt compelled to come back. But he could not find her. He became angry, and
told everyone about her, about her beauty, and the way she treated him. Many
didn't believe him, but he insisted that she was real. So everyone mocked him
for his discovery of the maiden of truth.

And one day, a carpenter stumbled upon her cave, and when he saw her, he was
filled with such awe that he knew that the fisherman's tale must be true,
because he also had found her. He stepped up, and revered her for her beauty.
But the Maiden again told the man that he did not belong there, and that he
should leave. But the carpenter knew that, just like the fisherman, if he were
to leave, he would never see her again. So he refused, and overpowered her. He
raped her. She could not resist, she was not able to. He mounted her, and
defiled her. He raped and killed her.

Then he emerged from the cave with a son, and said "I cannot bear the burden of
my son." He left him in the woods, and then killed himself.

The son then began to grow in the woods. He could not die. Every animal would
flee from him, and every where he stepped, mushrooms would grow.

One day, another man came in to the woods, and he asked the son what he was
doing. The son knew not how to speak, and merely opened his arms up to the man,
glowing as he did. The man walked up to the son, scared and afraid, but
captivated by his presence, and reached out his hand. The son did the same, and
their fingertips met.

The man's eyed changed color, the son's glow filled him, and the man said, "I
am man, and I must tell all other men about men" So the man went back to his
village, and told the people, "We are men, and we were put here for the glory
of God."

He was killed for his words, because the men did not understand his behavior,
and found it dangerous. But his proclamation resonated with them, and story of
the strange man was passed down through generations as a ritual of sacrifice. A
member of the group would be brought forth to be killed to act out the telling
of this self-introspective man.

Meanwhile, the son followed had followed the man, and watched, and saw as he
was killed by those who heard him speak the truth. So the son did not
interfere, but went up to the mountain, and sat, and waited for the next man
who might venture to see him.

I don't know if this is how the story goes or not. 
