# On Knowledge

Knowledge is a concept that many of us take for granted, but few take the time
to really unpack it's meaning. To the lay person, having knowledge of something
simply means having facts stored, with the ability to recall. For instance,
when I receive a ten digit number from a girl, I cas use the knowledge of that
number to send messages to a device in her purse which see can read as she
pleases and reply to. It was because I had the ability to produce this girls
phone number that I would say that I have knowledge of it.

But suppose now that she gave me a fake number. Before I send a message to the
number, I am acting under the assumption that I have knowledge of this girls
phone number. However, after I send a text message to it, I come to understand
that she has given me a number that does not represent hers. I would say that
now I do not have knowledge of this girls phone number, and actually never did.
I was incorrect when I said I had that knowledge before, and I am aware of that
now.

What I am getting at here is, knowledge is something we all talk about and
reason about, but when we try and say just exactly what is knowledge it becomes
tricky to pin point it down to an exact definiton.

We could say that knowledge is, "All the things we have stored in our memory."
This works well for talking about how a person perceives the world, and would
be useful for predicting the ability of an individual, but it does not tell us
the legitamacy of the things that we have in our memory. For instance, I could
be someone that believes the earth is flat, and base all of my understanding of
astronomy off of this fact. When it comes to assessing how well this person
will do in a game of Basketball has little to do with his belief that the earth
is flat, but he holds his belief dear to him, and it shines through in his
basketball game.

With the above definition of knowledge this instance, we would say that this
man has knowledge of the fact that the earth is flat. Because we can say
something like this, we must choose another way to define knowledge.

So perhaps our knowledge would be something like, "All of the things we have
stored in our memory that are true." This again seems like a reasonable
definiton of knowledge, and in fact, it could, in some ways, be consisdered the
most correct one. But it runs in to a weird edge case. How do we determine
which things are true?

You could say something like, "When we understand something to be the case
beyond a reasonable doubt, we will say that it is true."

But to our flat-earth basketball player that we spoke of earlier, something
like the flatness of the earth is, in his mind, beyond a reasonable doubt a
true statement. So for our definition of knowledge to be satisfactory in this
case, we would have to have some judge, seperate from the man, determine
whether or not the things he has in his memory are true or not.

So this would be a great definition, except for the fact that it requires an
all knowing and all powerful judge of the truthness and falseness of claims
orginating from the set of all statements the man would say that he "knows".

In order to make this definition work, we must work towards some sort of
"universal standard" and based upon this standard, judge all statements as
either true or false. Once we do this, we take all of the statements that a
person has stored as his or her "knowledge", parse out the ones that are false
according to our universal standard, and what we are left with is the full
knowledge of this individual, under our second definition.

At this point, let's take a quick pause. We could continue stabbing at
definitions in this way, but I want to take a different approach. Instead of
starting with the question "what is knowledge" and working from there, we must
instead realize that we are working with something that is made up. In other
words, all of us as humans have this sense of what it means to know something,
but "knowledge" isn't actually a real thing, so any definition of knowledge
will always leave something to be desired. What I would like to do is try and
appreach the subject from the inside out, working to begin with some kernal of
absolute knowledge, and then branching out from there, until we come up with a
defintion of knowledge which I would argue has to be the most satisfactory.

So if we are to begin with something of an inductive definition of knowledge,
then what are we to take as our basis case, our kernal?

I think, in order to justify the step I am about to make, I want to take
ourselves on a bit of a journey. I want the reader to imagine that they are
floating in space. There is no gravity, there is no air, there is no wind. By
some process, unknown to you, you are not being torn apart by the intense
vacuum, and you are somehow able to function without breathing air. We can say
this is an alternate versoin of reality where living beings can live and
prosper in outer space.

So in this alternate existance, you are simply a floating body in space. You
can contract your limbs, and when you do so in a certain way, you can feel the
effects such as Newton's second law at direct work with the other parts of your
limbs. You are able to feel as though you are floating in an endless vacuum,
and when you look around you see nothing but blackness and hear nothing but
silence. The only things you can see or hear are your own thoughts, and your
own sensations. For instance, perhaps one day you decide to do an ab workout in
space, so you contract your abs, curling yourself into a ball, and then you
relax your abs and contract your back, arching yourself back into a bridge. You
do this for one hundred reps, and you start to feel a burning sensation in your
abdomen, and you feel your muscles start to fatigue.

Now, imagine yourself as this man, floating in an endless void of space. You
can't scream, because there is no sound, and you can't see because there is no
light. In fact, you can't feel temperature because there is no such thing as
hot and cold, and you don't feel direction because there is no need for
concepts like up and down. However, as you start to do the crunchs, there is
one thing you can feel, and that is the feeling of fatigue.

Suppose now, one day, the floating man, while he is in the middle of some
crunches, gets passed by a space ship. The space ship hails him, and they say,
"Ahoy there, I see a floating man in space in front of us, steady the bow."

In order to understand this, we must put ourselves in the perspective of the
floating man. This man has never experienced sound, or sight, or even language,
and now he is being bombarded with brand new experineces. The first and most
natural thing for the floating man to think is that he is hallucinating.

Our floating might decide to reach out to the space ship. When he does, the
captain of the ship will reach out his hand, and grasp the hand of the floating
man, and hoist him in to the ship.

From this point, there are a lot of new sorts of experiences for the floating
man to experience.

One of teh first things that he would do is learn how to commune with the
members of the space craft. After some time, first learning things like how to
receive food and how to drink water, the floating man would start to notice
that the sounds that these space men made with their mouths wasn't random at
all, but instead was made to form a sort of pattern. With enough practice the
floating man would be able to replicate these sounds, and eventually
communicate with the crew.

I could continue on with examples of how the floating man will continue to
integrate himself in to his new situation, but any reasonable textbook on
developmental psychology will give you an idea of the sorts of things that the
floating man will have to become acquanited with if he is to become a member of
the society of these space men.

So the reason I illustrate this floating man is not because I think it's a cool
story and that it should be told for it's own sake, but instead it's because I
think this story crystalizes the idea which will be the kernal from which we
will work. My crystallized statement is this.

All of us is that floating man. We are each like a ball of sensations floating
in space. Just as our floating man experienced things like sight for the first
time, or sounds for the first time, or gravity for the first time, we, also, as
human beings, have a similar experience integrating ourselves in to the world.
Before there were space men, the floating man only had his own body, and only
knew of the sensations that he received from his body. If we are to take our
analogy to our most natural extreme, the floating man represents the fetus, and
the space men represent the mother after delivering her child. But this is only
one such analogy that can be made here.

The point is, just as the floating man only knows of the things that he
experienced, and just as teh floating man was able to adapt to the things that
he was experiencing so as to intergrate himself in them, so we only know the
things that happen to us, and we are able to as best we can adapt to those
things and adjust how we live in the world according to how the flows of time
present themselves to us.
