So today is a tuesday. I don't know what I want to write about, but I told
myself that I was going to write right now, and so that is what I am doing. I
do want to say, that typing on this logitech piece of shit is really starting
to wear on me, and I can't wait until my next mech comes in the mail. That will
be the day.

I might even, in antcipation of getting that new mech, just bring my current
one in to the office. I could use my Corsair in the mean time, and when my new
mech comes in, that one can be used for the house.

I think that would be better, because the new one will be the sort that I can
use for gaming, and the current one is nice because it has the function row
keys.

So with that out of the way, I want to talk about what it is that I wanted to
write about. I want to create something of a series, titled something to the
likes of "Things I've learned from Mathematics (and you should too)". Of
course, that is a cheesy Barnes and Noble exclusive kind of title, but it's
more or less what I think everyone should know about certain mathematical and
physics principles.

The first kinds of articles I have thought about writing are.

On numbers.
The Lorentz Transformation.
Evaluating functions for complex numbers.
Maclarin series and their analytic functions.
Trigonometric identities.

Of course, there are many, many, more things to write about here.

The next sort of article that I am working on is the "retold myths" articles. I
am currently working on a "dialogue of Seth and Cain" as a sort of entrance in
to this domain. Some more ideas for this section is.

Noah's ark
Samson
Jonah
Specific miricle of Jesus

And so on. Like the first option, you could see the limitless possiblities for
articles of this sort.

For the first kind of article, it will be nice, because I won't have to do
anything to make it polished. I think, the best thing to do, actually, would be
to learn latex, and write it that way. Regardless, the point is, these
articles won't have drafts. They will be more straight from the horses mouth,
so to speak. In fact, most of these sorts of articles will require more time in
preparation than in actual writing, and drafting will be next to non-existant.

On the other hand, the other sort of artcile, the retold myths article, will be
more challenging. I think partly because I am not as familiar with myths as I
am with math, but also because it will require more drafting, more raw
material, and a lot of introspection. It will be more difficult to get
everything out on the page, and unlike the first kind of article, this sort of
article will not neccesarily come easily, or correctly, the first time it is
written.

This kind of article has the advantage that I can just write whatever I want,
and it will at least have some merit, but the biggest thing when it comes to
writing this sort of article is to remember that it comes in increments, and
that you don't have to use everything you write.

So today is still Tuesday,but I am back at my apartment. I just got a new
board, and I am still attempting to get all of the settings on it correct, but
I am to the point now where I can see on the thing what it looks like.

It's weird seeing the qwerty layout on my board while I type with my fingers. I
wonder if I were to put the qwerty layout on my screeen if it would make any
sense to me. It would probably seem like gibberish if I had to bet.

Regardless, I think this is a good idea. I like this idea of typing like this
on a new board. I don't want to relearn qwerty. I want to get much faster with
dvorak first. I am about 18 months into dvorak, and I can safely say that I am
back to my qwerty levels of typing for sure.

One comment I will make, something of a difference between my dvorak and qwerty
use cases, is that in dvorak, I am much more consistent with the keys that I
hit. With qwerty, I would have upwards of 10 percent accuracy loss, where as on
dvorak it's rare that I have 2 percent loss. If I see 97.8 or something, I
think, "Oh my, it's time to step back and slow down." where as with qwerty, I
go, "89.8 loss isn't so bad, if it means I can get a faster wpm". So in that
sense, my mindset has shifted pretty dramatically with how to analyze certain
metrics.

Something I love doing occasionally is just writing on the board without any
care as to what gets written. It's hard to do, but if you concentrate in a
weirld way for long enogugh, you just start writing, and the fingers just start
making movements, and you don't know what any of it means, you just know that
the way that your fingers are going is the way that you want them ot go. You
start to get a sort of momentum going, and you start to see how fast you can
really go, and you don't concern yourself with things like mistakes or thinking
of words or any of that, you literally just write for as much as you are able,
and when you are done writing, you stop doing that, and then that is that.

I don't know what I just wrote. Haha. Seriously. That's anothing cool thing
about "momentum" is that you can have momentum, and you can come to it, and you
can look at the words around the word that you are writing right now, and you
can find other key words in that area, and you can keep wirting on things of
that topic for as long as it seems to flow. As long as the words are flowing
out of the fingers, you should just keep writing.

So now that we have that out of the way, I am to a point now where I don't know
what my wpm is, and I don't know what my accuracy is, but I know I have gotten
to the point where both are pretty darn good, especially in the case that I
have only used the layout for something like 14 months now.

I also want to make clear, in that fourteen months, I have been occupied with
quite a lot of other things as well. Things like getting arrested and charged
with a felony, or rear ending another man and buying a new car the next day.
Also, my dad got Luekemia.

So yeah, needless to say, something like, "charting my progress as a line graph
on dvorak" was not on my highest priorotiy of things to think about this year,
but I have been able to provide pretty solid evidence, I would say from my
typracer scores, as well as this journal, that I am able to type rather
adequetely in dvorak, and that any idea that somehow I am in any way
handicapped because of this transition is nonsense at best.

Regardless of that, I think my progress in this writing system is coming along
rather nicely. I am getting to the point where I can mostly just think thoughts
and have thouse thoughts come out onto the keyboard. I want to buy another one
of these, but with different keycaps. So the thing about this keyboard, and red
key caps in general I would say, is that the mx-reds have a certain lightness
to them that feels weirld. I feel weird when I rest my fingers on them. Also, I
do want to say that when I type on this new keyboard, there are certain keys
that squeek.

In fact, right now, I am just going to do something of a keytest.


'''''''''''''''',,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.................pppppppppppppppp
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaooooooooooooooooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjkkkkkkkkkkkkkkkk

yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiixxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxffffffffffffffff
ddddddddddddddddhhhhbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbgggggggggggggggghhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmccccccccccccccccrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrlllllllllllllllltttttttttttttttt
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnssssssssssssssss----------------wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
1111111111111111222222222222222233333333333333334444444444444444
55555555555555555666666666666666677777777777777778888888888888888
99999999999999990000000000000000[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]
                                    

This is some text.                                                

I am checking out how this keyboard types.

I am rather confabulated right now with how well I can type. I bottom out like
a mother fucker on this keyboard. I think the problem is taht it doesn't allow
for very light presses of teh keys. I think the problem with the tacticle
keyboards is taht the tactile press shouldn't be so tight. This is tight for
the wrong reason.

I don't know how I feel about this keyboard right off hand. It squeaks, for
one, so that sort of sucks. It's mostly the space bar. Let me take it off and
examine it.

--

So it is time now to try and attempt oto write inthe complete dark. I like this
because it makes me slow down my words and really spell out what it is I am
rying to say, but at the same time, I'm not so concerned with mistakes that I
stop and write them again.


So right now I want to talk about th e prophecy. This is the prophecy of
Gabriel. 

When Adam and Eve were leaving the Garden of Eden, and the Archangel Michael
locked the cgate behind them, he returned to heaven. Then, many days later, the
archangel gabreil came down to Adam and Eve, in  a flurry.

"Welcome," the archangel begane, " am teh archangel Gabriel. I ahave come to
inform you of the things you are to know, and the things taht are to come for
you.

Adam and Eve looked shocked to see the archangel gabriel appear before them.
They had spent the last few days discussing amonsgst themselves what their next
goal should be.

Now, they were being visited by teh archangel Gabrieal. How such a turn of
events has occurered.

"So," teh archangel continued, " I have news from God about the incidencts that
have occured here. There are many poinnts to cover, so let us begin at point
number 1.

"Point number 1: Adam and Eveincapable of resisting temptaiton even when they
are given unlimited happiness.

Point 2: Adam and Eve lied to me about the actions that they took.

Point Number 3, Adam and Eve demonstrated a remarkable ability to stick
togethre, and take all actions, even the bahdd ones, in unison.

Becasute of these things, " the archangel continued, "And of course the fact
that ssomething like the garden of eden counld not be susntaisned for ever, the
God almighty, who called himself Yahweh around you but goes by many names
acreosss masny cultures, wants to tell you this message.

This message is that, in some time, there will be one that is godly in every
way,.  He ill bet the essence of god himself, rieincarnated into the flesh.
This one will save the people of the human race.

"God wanted me to tell you that."

With that, the archangel Gabriel flew off before Adam and Eve could ask him any
questions.

Of course, Adam and Eve were very confused about what just happened.
Immeditely, they confirmed with eachother that they each sa an angel, and that
they each could corraborate the others sotry.

Wehn they knew they were talking on the same page, the y then got to asking
eatch other about what it could possibly mean for there to be one to come as
God reincarnated. Those were the angeles exact words.  "They debated the
nuances of what a sentence like that might mean. FOf course, since Gabriel flew
away immediately , they could not ask him, buwt intstead could nonly write it
down.

Along with what the y wrote down of what gabriel said, tGabriel also bore the
symbol of the Four Pedal Cross. This symbol, adam drew with the writings, and
left it as "the prohpecy of Gabriel."

These texts (the so called prophets of Gabriel) were later to be told in the
biblacal canon stories, and laters in Milton. Beyond this, I beiliev this ins
the next mention of this in any recorded text of teh 21 st centrry( I know that
is not true but I like to belive it anywayway. 

So without further ado, I must say, that the way that I am able to talk and
think on this koeyboard is something else. I see the worsd appearing before me
in my mind and I am amble to type them out on this keyboard witouthout earror,
and without prbolme, for as long as I like, I can just keep on writing whatever
I want. Iti s literally wone word at a time that writing like this is made. I
do'n t care how else you think writing happens, it comes in writing a lot of
words like this, and keeping teh good ones.

So in thi s isnstance, these words here are not the good ones, and the owrlds
above should probably be rifinde into something better.

However, I think I got the general jist of the fact that the thing is the most
significante, that is, one of the themese of the story. That them is... I am
drawing a blank. .. There was a thieme that was the theme of teh story that I
thought was a prominante thema. I could re read it and f ind it wbut I would
rather keep tying ing. The story of Ezeiewkial.

The key points of this story are.

    There is a bulletetd list of the ways that Adam and Eve fucked up.
    Gabriel hands them their sentance, signed and sealed final by god.
    Gabriel gives them a promise of a man to come.
    Gabriel flys away before Adam and Eve can ask questions.
    I think that's about it.

So that is something of the outline of the story above. Of course, there is
bporbably more to say about it, but that is neither here nowre there about this
matter rigthght now.

I love this keyboard by the weay.

I love the way it sounds when I type.

I could totally bring this in to the writing work shop and make a bunch of
noise while I tyipe like this.

Oh, it would be so silly. 

fuckk me.

I am getting tired.

I am getting done with writing.

But still, I have th e story out on paper.

I feel as though it can playiy in to the Seth and cain story, even if it
doesn't actually go in the final draft.

So we will see.

