So yesterday I went to the six am morning BJJ class for the first time. After
that, I went to work, took a shower in the work showers, and then made my way
up to the office. We worked as we do. In the morning, I asked Chris if I could
join him in his workout. He said that he was not working out because he had to
go to lunch with an interviewee that we were having that day, but that Luis
might. So I asked Luis if I could join him in the workout, and he said sure.

But then, later in the day, Luis said that his kid and wife are both at home
sick, and that he has to take the afternoon off. I said that it's cool. Luis
left around one.

So around three, I went downstairs to work out. I ran a mile at about a ten
minute pace, then I did some of the Bikram poses. After that, I did some
pullups and handstand pushups. I then cooled down with a light jog at an eleven
minute pace.

After that, I took another shower in the work showers, and went back upstairs
to continue to not really work on anything.

I then went to the main class, and really went after it. I stayed intense on
the drills, and I really gave myself in the rounds. I made sure that I pushed
myself to the point of exhaustion so that I could work inside of that space.

From there, I drove back to my apartment, drank about a quart and a half of
milk with chocolate syrup, and proceeded to collapse onto my mat on the floor
and fall to sleep hard.

In the night, I woke up twice. The first time I woke up, I could feel that I
was a touch uncomfortable and I conjectured that it was something about the
hormones in my digestive cycle of the milk. I was fortunately able to
immediately return to sleep.

The second time I woke, I was very hungry. I considered getting up and eating
some food, but decided against it. I fell asleep again.

The last time I woke up, it was time to wake up for work. I had fallen asleep
by 9:30 and woke up at 7:30. And for this one it was legit 9:30 falling asleep
time.

I have been at work now for two hours, and have done little more than browse
reddit. I need to stop. I'm stopping that now. I need to work on things for
work.

Right now I want to do some freewriting. I am to the point where I have done
some quotes on typeracer, and I feel as though I have been writing other
peoples words for a bit now, and I don't like it. I want to write my own words,
damn it. It feels so much more natural to type in this way, saying things as
they come out of my head, rather than taking other peoples words and saynig
them for myself. It doesn't make any sense that I should type other peoples
words. If I wanted to test my typing speed, I should test my typing speed when
I am typing the things that I want to type. Of course that makes sense, but
here we are, and the state of things is such that I am able to talk about the
things taht I am able to talk about, and still, I am typing things that other
people are talking about for no reason other than that I want to get fake
internet points on a website that doesn't even matter.

Of course, the purpose of going to typeracer and writing something is not,
ultimately, to get fake internet points. The points are what keep you
interested and coming back to the site. But really, what the point is for is to
get better at typing in general. It's a way to force yourself to write things
even when you don't have anything in your head that you want to write. And of
course, when you write things, regardless of what they are, you get better at
writing them, and when you get better at writing things it feels good. When it
feels good, you go back to it, which in turn makes you better at writing, and
so the cycles continue.


