12:43 am

I just finished watching S02E12 of the Orville, where a female Mochlan colony
is protected by Commander Grayson, and it pulled up some deep shit from my
past.

So before I go over this story, I want to go over something else first.

I think alcohol is bad for me now. Since I had my almost anyeurism/stroke
thing, I have entirely lost my taste for alcohol. If I'm high, I don't want
alcohol, and if I'm sober, I don't want alocol. Wine is the worst. I drank
literally like one sip of wine and it was the worst sort of experience of my
day today. Like, I thought to myself, "I could have not had any of that wine,
and instead, that would be better for my life".

But I think it is because, this is something that I have never admitted to
anyone, not even in writing like this.

So right now, I am racanting things that happened to me two years ago now. Take
note, that this means that I'm really talking about some time in like april of
2017. Thereabouts. Right? Or was it 2016? I was 25. So maybe April 2016.

Yes, because I was already doing BJJ in 2017. So 2016.

I am addicted to a particlar kind of video game. The patch for Sephirot in
FFXIV just hit, and I was farming that with this girl I liked, who also lived
in houston, who was also my raid leader.

She and I farmed Sephirot for something like probably 40 kills together, with
the rest of the raid team, and we were getting drunk and having fun with it.

After we killed it ten times for a group that her and I joined explicitly
because we were both drunk, and I wanted to play warrior, and she chose to play
Astro and feed my cards, so we just went in to the random PF group, I took the
lead as the Main Tank, and she healed the shit out of me while doing dps and
feeding me all of the extended balance and enhanced balance and all of the
cards which buff strength. She also Esuna'd (or benefic or whatever the astro
version of it was) the pacification.

And I must say, I girl that knows how to esuna some pacification is a girl that
knows how to make a man horny.

damage numbers off teh charts. There are moments when she is doing damage and I
am about to die, but as I am going, she hops out of cleric stance, throws two
gcds of strong heals my way, and tells me that shes going back in to cleric and
that I shouldn't die until she wants to heal me.

Then, in the downtime when we are dancing, she gets a mana regen card, and puts
in on herself and does more damage to the boss because of it. Then she draws
the balance, stores it, and then, when she see's my berserk is coming up, she
draws the spear, and she royal road's the spear, and then enhancing me with the
most over powered version of anything in the game at that time.

I saw numbers in the 11,000, in the 12,000 damage for fell cleaves. I was
easily the top dealing damage dealer as the actual main tank, and then my
healer was something like the fourth or third or sometimes second on the list
with six other dps in the party.

That is some arrosusing shit right there. To find a girl that will do that for
you, while drinking, and getting aroused together while doing it, is a wondrous
thing that I think I only knew once in that moment and will probably never know
exactly in that way ever again.

So we ended up sharing dirty messages back and forth, and over the course of
the hour, her and I orgasmed that night. Or at least, I know I certainly
orgasamed, and she tells me she did and I presume that, if her and I were in
the same state of mind to send dirty messages back and forth to each other non
stop for an hour straight, then I imagine she probably wasn't lying when she
said that she orgasmed also.

Of course, she could have been lying about that, but I presume no.

Regardless, and this is the part of the story that I have never told this to,
literally the next day I woke up with this crazy headache.

I made some eggs in the morning and thought to myself "Eh, I'm just hungover
(I literally had four glasses of whiskey and ice, so it made sense) and I
thought that I could sleep it off.

Remember also that I had no responsibilites in that time.

Well, fast forward to the end of that day, and my parents are leaving to go to
this cult of a wedding. In the two days that have gone by, my headache hasn't
really gone away, even though I haven't had anything more to drink in the last
48 hours. Besides water, of course, but absolutely nothing alcoholic. Maybe I
drank some milk also. I don't remember.

Anyway, the next morning, my parents leave to go to Tenessee, and I say, "Okay,
have fun" or whatever as they drive off, and I go back to playing the game.

But as I'm playing the game, something is weird. First, I still have a bit of a
headache, but I think that might be because of lack of sleep, or too much
sleep, or something like that. I didn't realize it at the time, but the
headache hadn't gone away at all, and it was just this dull pain that existed
and that my left brain kept confabulating reasons for.

But as I was playing the game, also, I started to feel a strange tingly in my
left hand. It's as if my hand doesn't want to work right. At first I think that
perhaps I pinched in weird in the way I was sitting, so I got up and I tried to
stretch.

I could move my arm, and at the time, I could widen out and compress my hand as
I pleased, so I argued that it was probably some sort of result of being tired.
My left brain came up for a reason why my left arm was numb.


So I stop playing the game, and I decide to go outside and try a workout. I go
for a jog around the block, and I didn't realize it when I was escaping into
the mmo, but outside, exerting actual physical energy, I realized that my
headache was actually really bad. But as I jogged around the block, I told
myself taht, like it always goes, I will get into the workout, and eventually I
will get to the point where my headache and my feelings of numbness and other
ailments will seem irrelevent.

But as I jogged back in to the yard, I still felt like shit, so I decided to
keep warming up with some other stuff, as I usually do.

So I did some leg swings and those felt okay.

Then I did some squats, and those felt all right.

Then I did some lunges, and those felt good too.

Then I tried a handstand hold, and as soon as I went upside down, I felt a
sharp pain, like a bullet shot, in my head.

In hindsight, I can label it, because I know where the arachnoid hemorage
actually occured. It occured in the upper part of my right top cortex thing.

I don't know the technical terms, but basically it can be summed up with,
"Brett went upside down, blood went into his head, and when it did, it went in
to places that blood should not go."

Now, mind you, this was after four days of a continuous headache that would not
go away, a crazy night of alcohol and what I consider to be in the top three
orgasms I've ever had in my life (and I must say that the other two might
belong to Ciara as well, except I know one of them certainly does not.) That
next morning I felt like death itself. Then, the next day, I didn't feel like
death, but I felt sort kinda all right. At least, I felt better than death, so
that was improvement, and I had no reason to believe that improvement wouldn't
keep happening.

But then, me and my wise ass decided to go upside down, and my brain, which was
deciding the best way to heal the damage I had done by combining too much
alcohol with one of the best orgasms of my life, was not prepared to be flooded
by a surge of unexpected blood, and when that happened, my brain just decided
"You know what, fuck this kid, I can't control his left arm"

So the right part of my brain hurt, and my left arm immediately felt numb.

But then, when I went inside, I tried to drink some water, but it didn't taste
good, and I tried to eat some food, but I absolutely did not want any.

Then, I layed down in the foof chair, and I wasn't sure which one of my arms
was numb, if it was my left or my right.

So I decided to do some research, after three hours of lying there and taking a
strange sort of nap kind of thing.

I looked up things like numbness, and caffine. Because I had taken some coffee
the morning of, so I thought that maybe coffee with the ibuprofin I had taken
was somehow causing the numbness. But that didn't seem right, and nothing I
found said anything of the sort.

So I thought "Fuck it, I'm super tired, I'm done playing this silly game
anyway, it's hard to use my left hand for some reason and I'm done trying for
tonight, I'm going to sleep."

So I went to sleep.

As soon as I went to sleep (I took 800mg more of ibuprofin before I did) I
immediately felt my left arm float up in to space.

I was laying on my right side, on the floor, and I tell you, the moment of
bliss when I felt myself let go of my left arm, and dream of an existance where
my left arm didn't exist, and how wonderful and nice that place was, I couldn't
bear how beautiful it was, so I went to sleep for fourteen hours straight.

Now, I want to point out that it is not uncommon for me to sleep for inordinate
ammounts of time. My record is sixteen hours, and I have slept eleven hours
many many times.

Nine hours is my minimum, if I get less than that it's bad.

So I love sleep, and fourteen, while it is indeed a lot for me (I have slept
fourteen hours probably a half dozen times in my life) is not uncommon for me,
especially at that time in my life.

So imagine the scene.

I wake up, and I check the time. I went to sleep around nine in the evening,
and it's eight in the morinng, and my arm is still numb, and I am very tired. I
just woke up from this wonderful dream where I didn't care that I was missing
my left arm, and I wanted to go back to taht dream, so I go back to sleep for
three more hours.

Of course, in those three hours I had similar dreams about not having a left
arm, and it was great, but eventually I woke up.

When I woke up, it was approaching noon, so I stood up, and I stumbled around.
I attempted to move around my left arm, and while I could move it from the
shoulder, I could not wiggle my fingers. I thought, as I was lying there just
before I woke up, "Am I going to die from this? No (the dream confirmed that).
What should I do? Tell somebody."

So I got up, and I grabbed my phone, and around I think it was something like
three or four I finally called my parents. They were in Tenessee. I told them,
"Hey mom, hey dad, so I don't want to freak you out or anything, but I can't
feel my left hand."

After that whole phone call (which I could attempt to recite here, but would
most certainly be incorrect on some level) I told Evan what was up, and he
drove me to the medical first care place. They took me in, asked for my drivers
license, and told me to go to the back room and wait.

I sit there and I wait for around ten minutes when a pleasent nurse walks in
and asks me what's up. I tell her that I can't feel my left hand, and that I've
lost most control of it. She tells me to squeeze her fingers, and she can
immediately tell taht something is wrong and that I need to go to the ER.

That wasn't what I wanted to hear, but we decided from there that I suppose we
had to go to the ER.

So I went out, ad I told Evan what was up, and he shuttled me to the ER. In the
mean time, we called mom and dad and told them that we were on the way to the
ER, and that Evan had it under control.

We then called Kyle, and told him what was up, so he took off work, and met us
at the hospital.

From this point on, I would say that it is pretty well documented what happened
to me. I'm sure there is a hospital record some where with time stamps of who I
saw when, and what they said to me, and so on and so forth, and if we wanted to
create a time line of what happened, it would be a belabouring tasking, but it
could be done.

So yeah, that whole story is a story that I wasn't sure that I was ready to go
in to, but was ready to come out.

One last detail, which I am not sure to what degree my family understood this,
was that the number of people I wanted to know about this were them, my
brothers (Kyle, Evan, Jason), and that's it. So first I called my parents, then
Evan took me to the hospital, I told Kyle about it, who met me at the hospital,
and I was informed that Jason was made aware.

After this, I asked Evan if he could get on wifi. He said yes, he could. I then
asked if I could borrow his phone. You see, at this point in my life, I didn't
really have a phone, so I had to piggy back off of his to get a connection to
the internet.

What I did, was I went to the android app store, and I logged in as Evan
Webster. Then I went to skype, and I downloaded and installed it. It took
probably about twenty minutes total for skype to finish downloading while on
the hospital wifi internet, but it eventually completed.

When it was done, I logged in as Brettgwebster on Skype, and I asked Ciara if
she had time for a call.

She said yes.

So I called her, and I told her what was happening to me. This was for two
reasons.

The first reason was that she was my raid leader, and I wanted it to come to
her attention that her dark knight that she relied on at raid meetings and
during progression was going to be out of commission for some time.

The second reason I called her, which was auxillery to the first (becasue the
first was important enough to let my raid leader know no matter who the raid
leader was, because I was very involved in raiding and that involves huge
commitment) was because I thought I was falling in love with her. After all, I
had shared something like four to six orgasms with this girl up to this point
(and again, I presume she would not have been coming back for more if she were
not also orgasming herself) and I felt that it was important that she become
aware of my current state because, well, it just seemed right that she should
know, and not only thath she should know, and that I wanted to tell her over
voice, and that I appreciated the fact that she would listen to me.

Well, I can say that I definiitely had a warped view of what my hormones were
doing at that point. It's arguable that what happened was I gave myself an
orgasm so intense that it caused something in one of my arteries of my brain to
rupture, and then, only three days later before it had time to recover from the
monumentous occasion that was my orgasm three days prior, I decided to flood it
with blood by going inverted into it, thus filling it with blood that it could
not handle.

So it's strange to think that I would still have affection for this girl. After
all, my involvment with her led to me popping an aneuyrism in my brain almost,
or almost getting a stroke, or something, where I was hospitalized for multiple
days.  So it wouldn't make sense that I stay attached to her.

But the orgasms were too good, and we certainly shared at least a dozen orgasms
togethr, one of which was over voice, and many of which occured after that
entire incident.

So I remained with her, and it would have been a love story better than
twighlight if it didn't have the tragic ending that it does. Oh my, the turns
that fate puts in front of us. But that story is for another time.

Oh, and also, to tie it full circle, there was also this girl in the seventh
grade that I knew named Elizabeth, (what a pretentious name) who would go by
Elizabeth (when she could have just as easily gone by "beth" or "lizz" or
something less repulsive), and she was the most obnoxious girl in the class.

One day, she was interfering with my group project, and I was tired of her
constantly rumanging through my things and fucking up my project to do what she
needed to do for hers, so I got angry one day and I push her.

I did not push her hard, but she immediately made a big deal out of it, and got
a lot of sympathy for her pains and crys.

Of course, I should not have pushed her at all, but she was not at all innocent
in the situation either.

So that is what I have been up to for the past few hours now. Hopefully there
is good material in there.
