So this is another free writing session.

Currently, I have playing the video

[The Enigma TNG - Nightmares In Paradise](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q_4F2MQ9oBg)

I am not sure what I want to write about, but I do very much know that I want
to write.

I think, having now read some of harmon's work on the hero's journey, I want to
try my hand at writiting out some outlines for some stories to see if they go
through any sort of process.

So I think the first ingredient to coming up with any good story will be coming
up with a good setting for the story. Is the setting mythological? What sorts
of things can people do in this world that is unlike the real world?

Especially for sci-fi and fantasy, and even for works that are not such as
dramas, I think it's important that the setting is at least in some way
interesting.

For instance, even if the setting is just a medieval castle of some unknown
planet in some unknown universe, that could still take the form of a drama, a
sci-fi, or a fantasy still. We still don't know.

I think, the next thing to come up with in a story is what the big thing that
happens is. For instance, in Star Wars, Luke blowing up the death star is the
big thing that happens that most will remember the film for.

Or say, Lord of the Rings, Frodo sneaks the ring in to Mount Doom in Mordor and
destroys it. That's the big thing that happens.

And so on for other stories. Jonah is swallowed by a whale, Adam and Eve eat
the fruit, Cain kills Abel, Delialah cuts Samson's hair, and so on.

Once this big event is established, I think it is then important to decide from
what perspective we will see this event.

I have taken a liking to writing from the point of view of characters other
than the ones that are doing the things.

For instance, in my Seth and Cain story, I am merely having the characters
exchange dialog where they describe what happened to them or to others. I am
not having these characters do much of anything.

This is an extreme case. A less extreme case would have an audience member
listen to the speech of Jesus as he distributed 5000 fish and 7000 loaves of
bread, or whatever it was.

We could tell the story from the point of view of Jesus (which is what the
bible does) or we could tell the story for a different point of view. We could
tell it from an apostles point of view, or we could tell it from a random
pharisees point of view. Perhaps we could express it from a tax-collector's
point of view.

What I'm getting at is, the next step in writing the story is to determine from
what perspective the work is going to be placed from.

Now, I can think of some novels, and these are novels, which place many
characters at the forefront of the work. Still, even in these novels, I think
that there is usually a thread that goes through them that follows the whole
thing.

For instance, Aloysha is clearly the protagonist of Brother's Karamazov, but it
could be argued at points that we are taking the point of view of Mitya, or
Fyodor, or Ivan, or the half-brother (I forget his name). So, even though we
primarily focus on Alyosha, the primary action actually happens to all of the
other characters in the novel, and when it comes down to it, Aloysha himself
only takes a secondary role in most of the major events that happen.

To illustrate this more clearly, let's actually lay out the major events that
happen.

First, Aloysha is convinced to bring in his father and others to settle their
disputes. The main conflict, Aloysha begins to realize, is between Mitya, his
father, and some women who are being very coy with both of these men, as well
as a dispute over some specific sums of money. As the novel develops, Ivan
involves himself more in the affairs by living with them, and acting as a
mediator.

Eventually, the step brother kills the father, which sends Ivan in to a frenzy,
and places Mitya as the primary suspect. This also puts Grushenka and Katya in
awkward positions, but the resolution of alchemical processes produces a result
where Mitya and Grushenka become interjoined. Katya and Ivan have some strange
tensions, and the novel ends with Aloysha discussing a quabble that they had
earlier with some rocks.

So, all of that put together to say, Aloysha, even though he is undoubtedly the
main character of that novel, and the character that we follow throughout the
entire thing, takes very little part in most of the main events that happen in
the novel, and his role is little more than a catalyst in most scenes, if that.

Once we have decided on the main character, it's at this point that we can
start developing something like a time line for the things that happen to this
character. We ask ourselves the question "what sort of transformation do I want
the main character to go through as the result of witnessing or taking part in
whatever large event is the main event of my novel?"

Once you have answered that question (maybe he will watch the conflict and be
inspired to escape his own conflict, or maybe he will be roped in to fighting
with the rebels to destroy the death star), it's at that point that we have
something of a sequence of events for the character to go through.

From this point, other characters become important, so fleshing out who the
other characters are, and how they fit it, is what should happen at this step.


