So last night I had two dreams.

The first dream took place in a sort of alternate first person view of sc2. I
took the point of view of a probe, and I was recieving coaching from PiG. I do
want to note that I did not have him up on youtube or anything, it was silent
in the room when I had this dream.

So I remember being up on the main base, and walking down near the choke point.
PiG then instructed me to build a pylon, and when one didn't come out
immediately, he said, "What are you waiting for." At this point I said that I
was having trouble navigating the hotkeys, and he said, "Oh, you should just
practice building pylons really fast, look at me do it" And he started
selecting probes, and building pylons immeditely after selecting them.

At some point, he said, "You just need to expose yourself to having
conversation." Which is a weird thing to say, but it makes sense if you think
of my difficulty and anxiety with sc2 as related to my difficulty in
maintaining conversations that I find uninteresting.

Related to this dream, I think happening before it, I got a new keyboard. I
felt the keys, and they felt nice. I noticed this was a super small 40% layout,
but the layout wasn't quite dvorak. I started to take off the keycaps to mix it
around to the proper dvorak layout, but as I started doing that, it began
getting all mixed up, so eventually I decided to just take all of the keycaps
off, and rearrange them. That was the extent of that part of th edream.

So the other dream was actually a lucid dream. I wish I could remember how it
came about, because it wasn't entirely a seamless transition from waking to
dreaming, but I do remember that I felt the sleep paralysis, and I chose to let
myself feel paralyzed instead of moving with it. It feels really good, by the
way, if it were a drug I would totally take it. I mean, not really, but you get
the point.

Anyway, the dream materialized as a wal-mart store. But this store was more
like a giant box, with rows of shelves. I remember walking in to the store, and
there was a man there, and there was a center area that led to, I forget what
the name of the sign was, but on the right there was mens clothing, and on the
left there was womens.

One of the coolest things about this dream was, when I walked in, and I saw the
back of the store, I thought to myself, "Surely it's a bit longer than that"
and when I thought that, the store became longer. As in, I felt as though it
should be longer, and when I felt that, it became longer.

I understood that I was dreaming the whole time, and I began to walk around
looking for someone to talk to. At first, I wasn't sure what I was going to ask
them, but I just thought that I would talk to anyone, and ask them if they
could help me find something in the store.

So first I turned around and tryed to talk to the first man I could see, but he
ignored me and continued on his way. I then thought, "I know, I should talk to
an associate, that would make more sense. So I began to look around for someone
who worked there. At first, I couldn't find anyone, but eventually I found an
old man talking with a customer, and so I walked over, and I said, "Excuse me,
I was wondering if you could help me." But both of them turned kept their backs
turned to me, and gave me an "Eat Shit" sort of look, and walked away.

At this point, I wasn't sure what to do, and the dream started to vanish. I
wanted to try and keep it, but I could feel myself returning to my room, and at
this point I lost it completely.

I'm not sure how far on this endeavor I will be able to take it, once I start
smoking weed again. We will see.

So at work, during my nap, I had a false awakening dream. The thing is, I
actually remember the dream that I awoke falsely from.

So the dream took place in a version of this is us. In the show, there was a
large vacation house that the young family was going to, and I was watching
from within the house. It was a weird thing, like, I was hanging out while they
watched.

Anyway, my mom comes in as I am watching, and says, "Holy shit, you have to
watch this one, this is the episode where we find out how he died!" So I go,
"Oh, okay cool," but I'm more preoccupied with other things. My mom then
continues, "Because you know how we thought he died in an car accident on their
vactation trip to place x (I think x is Virginia, but that seems wrong when I
think back on it), well, now we know that it wasn't on the way, because they
made it here, and he is still alive."

So I continue to watch after my mom leaves, and then I see him and the wife go
into the bedroom.

While they are in the bedroom, they are sharing intimate things in whispers, as
couples do, and as they are talking, things start to get heated, like,
sexually. As they are getting heated, the guy reaches into the drawer, and he
pulls out a large fully automatic magnum, and starts investigating it, going,
"Hm, what is this, and what does this do." As he's looking at it, he starts
firing in random directions, but the wife, who is cuddling from behind, does
not get hit. Eventually, she tells him to put it away, before one of them gets
hurt. He hands it to her, and then goes into the bed, while she opens the
drawer, and begins to put it back. She also has a small glock, with the fully
automattic weapon, and as she is putting away the magnum, the glock goes off in
his general direction. The wife looks horrified, and starts going, "oh no, oh
no, oh no." but the husband turns to her and smiles at her behind the covers
and says, "Nope, I'm okay, fortunately you missed." The wife lets out a gasp of
relief as she continues to put the gun away.

Honestly, I'm surprised I kept it together during this dream, because it's so
ridiculous. The image of a couple playing with these guns expecting it to be
the tragic story of one of their deaths, only to have it turn out to be
nothing, is so silly that I don't even understand it.

Anyway, I woke up from this dream falsely. I was on the parking garage of
Alliant (where I was irl taking the nap) and my mom is there. As she is there,
I hop in her car, and in there is also Kinley and Everly. My mom is getting
ready to drop them off on the base level floor to Lacey, but it's not time yet.

Around this moment, I have a sort of realization that I was dreaming, and I
reflect for a moment on the missed opportunity of having a lucid dream.

Everly then started singing to me, the do re mi song from sound of music. My
mom mentioned that I might have something to add, and that I could help her
with her voice lessons, at which point I say that I'm not sure if I could help
since I never officially had voice lessons myself.

Regardless, she begins singing, and my mom mocks her a bit because she is way
off tune with her notes. But she says that Everly sings a different song way
better, something with more pronounced jumps (a perfect fourth down, I don't
remember what the song is), and Everly starts singing, and it sounds better.

We get to the base floor, and Lacey is there. Kinley and Everly are excited,
and ask if they are going to a grown up place, or if they are going to the care
bears. Lacey, who is worn down, says they are going to a grown up place,
because she doesn't want the to be so excited and she needs the quiet.

So I get out as well, and the place that we stopped at is something like a
foyer for a large arcade, but instead of video games at the arcade machines,
each one is like a different massage contraption.

I walk down the first row, and see some generic massage tables, and then I see,
towards the end of the isle, there are people who are doing head stands and
things like that, to loosen up their back, at the massage tables. I comment
this to myself, and I'm a bit surprised that people would be doing something
like this in public.

I continue down the back wall, where there are massage tables which have
"water massage" and in these machines, there isn't a table, but instead the
people lie in the water, and the waves of the water give them a massage.

I then go down another isle, and there are more of these water machines, and I
contemplate getting in one of them, but decide against it. It's around this
point that I wake up, for real this time, and irl I laugh at these dreams,
first at the fact that I "really did miss a lucid dreaming opportunity" and
then, when I eventually remembered it, at the absurd image of the first dream.

