So I sort of want to continue on with my story.

So when I left off, we talked about a man that was able to make mushrooms grow
by imbuing him with his hands. Also, for the purpose of this story, we are
going to take an omniscient point of view, and say that what's going on is,
this character who is named Jesus is something like the overman that Nietzsche
predicted. He did some sort of miricle, in this case, causing dormant mushroom
spores to come to life, that was entirely unexplainable to the people around
him.

Where we left off, we had just talk about how this farmer came to understand
Jesus, and came to know that things Jesus were claiming about the things he
could do were certainly legit.

As he slept that night, the shepard thought to himself. He thought, "What
possible explanation could I conjure up that explains Jesus's powers?" Of
course, him being inside the story, and not in our omniscient position, this
shepard doesn't know that Jesus is simply a genitic oddity. Through some
mutation, his DNA was able to interact with dormant spores DNA, and create a
sort of link, which would have a scientific name in our time, that connects the
dormant spores to life.

But from his earthly perspective, the Shepard says, "Surely this man is not a
god? But what else could he be? There is no other possible explanation that I
can conjure towards how this man is able to do these things, unless he is
either fooling me, which it seems pretty clear that he is not, or unless he is
a legitimate diety. But he can't be a legitamate deity. At least, not like the
ones spoken about in the odyssey or the iliad. Because those dieties had
something of an aura about them, and they all had magnificent powers. They were
strong, and they lived in the otherworld. But this man was not from the
otherworld. He said it himself, he's the Bastard of Mary, Wife of Joseph. It's
like he didn't have a father. So whatever kind of God he is, it must be the
kind that is able to possess any one of us at any time, and he has just so
happened to possess this man Jesus in the greatest possible degree."

And so the shepard goes to sleep, never knowing whether Jesus is the legitimate
son of God, and this is just the best that God can do as far as revealing
himself to us, or something else is going on, something else that the man can't
even fathom.

And when the shepard wakes, of course, he sees taht the mushrooms have fully
blossomed in his vase. At this point, he decided to eat them again, just to
make sure that these mushrooms were like the mushrooms he tried at his friends
house. Sure enough, moments after eating them, he saw unfold before himself the
makings of the universe. ALl of a sudden, the man went from seeing himself as a
farm, to instead seeing himself as a pattern of particles interacting with the
world around him. So indeed, whatever this Jesus man was doing to these
mushrooms, the farmer knew could only be positive.

Also, the shepard continued to think, "Does it truly matter from what source
this man Jesus brings these mushrooms? Whether it's some trick, or whether it's
the power of God. Either way, I have beautiful mushrooms, and when I eat them,
I am able to see that everything is right with the universe. Whether jesus is
god or not, these mushrooms most certainly contain the power of God.

And so, the farmer continues to plant the mushrooms, and he and the mushrooms
form a symbiotic relationship. The shepard understand his farm better, and is
able to feel and understand the things that it needs, and in doing so, he is
able to produce more and more bountiful crops.

Because of this, Jesus continues to go around spreading his gift to everyone.
Everyone in Galilee, and in Judea, and throughout the whole coast of the
meditarainian, Jesus went, and spread his gift, and every farmer, and shepard,
and carpenter, and tax-collector, and so on, were cultivating these mushrooms.

How far and wide Jesus spread himself before he died is not known, but for the
purpose of the story, we can say that he traveled great lengths, with multiple
visits to all major cities of the time. ANd the most magnificient plant was
being born to remind us of him. So the people of 100 years after that point,
many were continuing to grow the mushrooms, but there was another group that
thought the mushrooms were the spawn of the devil, and should be banned.

Of course, the mushrooms were not the spawn of the devil, they were merely the
workings of a genetically gifted man, but the people of 100 years after jesus
didn't know that, and they thought it was perfectly reasonable to say that the
mushrooms that everyone were talking about were witchcraft.

There was one among them who was most loud about this. He was addamantly
against any and all things mushroom. His name was Saul. Of course, this all
changed when he tried one for himself, at the urging of one of the people that
he was fighting, and after he did, he became their biggest supporter, renaming
himself Paul, and starting a campaign for mushroom advocacy.

In order to stage a successful campain though, they really had to play up the
powers of Jesus. They had to link it back to God, rather than the devil, so
they told the story as if Jesus were some sort of amazing being, who was the
actual son of God. They say he was born of a virgin, that he died and came back
from the dead, that he was able to turn water into wine, and so on. When this
started to propogate, even those that thought the mushrooms came from the devil
were quiet about their views, because the contrary view became the accepted
norm.

So now, 200 years after Jesus, people decide to create a church for this Jesus
man. They begin to create a ritual around eating his mushrooms. They get in a
circle, they sing praises, and they have a ritual where by one man distributes
the mushrooms of Christ to everyone attending, and they all eat the mushrooms
and exhibit transformative modes of behavior.

Eventually, though, the church starts to run out of mushrooms. Due to a lot of
continued controversy over them in the past couple of centuries, many people
want them outlawed entirely. They were not in the end succussful, but they made
the supply drop drastically in the time, when the mushrooms were simply on the
black market, to the point where nobody knows if the mushrooms people are
eating now are the ones that come from Christ, or whether or not they are
typical mushrooms.

The church start to run into this problem, so they propose something. They say,
"The mushrooms are merely an additive to the experience. What is important is
the ritual. We will use wafers, but continue on the ritual in the same way, and
people will still get the benefits as if they ate the actual mushrooms of
christ." So the church started using wafers and grape juice for the body and
blood of Christ.

So by about five hundred years after the time of Christ, people start to become
skeptical about the whole thing. There is a rumor that the church of Christ
started with a bunch of people eating mushrooms and gathering and chanting, but
the church of the day would not like anyone believing anything as crazy as
that. So the church begins to insist on a pacifist stance, saying that people
should remain centered, and rooted in their earthly ways, and should avoid
vices like mushrooms at all costs. Of course, at this point, the church is not
so much about the mushrooms at all, but instead is focused on Jesus and the man
that he was. The church has continued to tell a story about the birth of Jesus,
and his ressurection, and all of the miricles in between, and that is all the
story they tell you.

Of course, us being omniscient in this story, we know that Jesus was a genetic
mastepiece, and that he was not "divined by god" or anything crazy like that.
He merely had a DNA strain which, when it interactes with the dormant spores
through all of the dirt at the time, causes those spores to come to life. But
the people at the time were not equipped to understand it, so now we have
multiple generations of attempting to explain what actually happened, and no
one has the complete story correct. So around the point 500 years after the
man's death, there are just a bunch of stories, and it's known that some of
them might not be true exactly, but that what's important is that we understand
what sort of man he actually was.

The thing that is the most certain by the church is that Jesus was the son of
God and that he came to heal us as Humans beings. So at this point, we have
this understanding that Jesus was somehow the most important thing that ever
happened, because he started the church, and the church of course, having it's
own self interest at heart, tells everyone that teh church is the most
important thing that has happened. So everyone gathers around, and a lot of
them believe this, so they gain their own convictions about what happened,
there are some, more critical thinkers, that think that Jesus isn't exactly
what the church says he was, but they don't have enough facts to know at all
what he actually was. And then there are even more people that just accept what
the church is telling them, because it makes the most sense to them, and it
satisfies some inner urge in them to believe in something.

This is the most "immutable" story that has developed at this point. The virgin
birth, magnificient life, and ressurection are the most important points to the
church, and they create creeds and such to articulate in exactly what way they
believe about who Jesus was and what he did.

And so the church, even though it started with the spreading and consumption of
magic mushrooms, turns in to something else entirely apart from the magic
mushrooms. I transforms, over generations, into a ritual of something in the
past, and after some generations, people forget and only hear rumors about what
the church used to be.

So even further into the future, we start to have crusades. There was a man
named mohhammad who came around, and he claimed that, although Jesus was a
prophet, he was not the divine son of god. Mohhammed claims that Jesus was not
a divine figure, but instead that he was merely a prophet, just like himself.
So Mohhammed gathers a group around him that all share the belief that there is
one true God Allah, that is like the god of the Jews, and the Christians, but
that sends down prophets at times. Jesus was simply a prophet that created
stories about human beings, and these stories were inspired by god, and
whatever power Jesus had came from Allah, because all things must come from
Allah.

Of course, there were many more things that mohhammed did in his life time,
besides just make his own claims about Jesus. Mohhammed was something of a
charismist himself, and in the way of great leaders, people started to worship
him, and create something of a church in his name. This church becomes the
church of Islam.

By this point, churches have become a fundamental part of these peoples lives.
From the moment they are born, to the moment they die, every week these people
go through these rituals and procedures, and many of them pleasure in the
experience, because it satisfies some visceral, unexplained desire inside of
humans. So the church of Islam started as merely a gathering of people with
differing views of those of teh Church of Christ. ANd likewise, there are those
that believe that neither Jesus nor Mohhammend are more than just mere
prophets, and would harken back to a time when we only saw God in ourselves and
not as the embodiment of others. These people are Jews.

More years go by. We are beginning to integrate more and more into our
surroundings, and we start to discover other cultures with other tribes. The
people of the east talk about Taoism, or Confusionism, or something similar,
and while it has similarities to Christianity, there are differences. Most
notably, the Christians fixation on the events of this one man, Jesus Christ.

Now, in attempting to integrate these stories together, we have some
difficulties. There are things which are simply irreconcilable between these
religions. So in Hinduism, the religion works as a polytheistic level, so Jesus
is permitted in that religion to be "one of the dieties". Of course, this only
makes sense to the Hindu's, but the Christians are most certainly insulted by
such a view, because their idea is that Christ is the "Only" person that should
be promoted to diety status, and that all other dieties are false idols that
fall short of the glory of Christ. Christians will only accept hinduism if
hinduism recognizes Christ as the only divine being. Of course, the hindu's
already have their own ideas about what their gods mean, so to them it just
sounds like the Christians are talking nonsense.

So Christianity and Hinduism just agree to disagree about the nature of Christs
work.

Of course, us being omniscient observers, we know that what really happened, is
that Christ was a happy genetic accident, and that he did have some abilities
that would be considered divine to those of the time, from our position we know
that his DNA was interacting with dormant spores in the ground, and bringing
magic mushrooms to life with his phermones.

So when we look at what the people 1500 years after Christs death thought about
it, they were fighting over two viewpoints that are both wrong. Either they
think that Jesus was in no way special, or that he was the divine son of god,
which are both innocorrect. Jesus was special, in this scenario, because he
could make mushrooms grow with his hands. But he was not the divine son of god.

Of course, the people around 1500 years after Jesus's time had no way of
knowing that. Even if such a theory were to come up, it would be "just another
theory" with no backing behind it. In this way, the truth of the past can never
surface because the it get's buried with all of the other stories.

Now, at the same time as all of this in fighting between religions, there are
some people who can't be bothered with things like that. Instead, they are just
interested in what we can know through experiment. So they want to know what
sorts of things we can hypothesis about, perform an experiment which will
confirm or deny that hypothesis, and from that process create somethnig like
the "knowledge of things that have been shown by experiment."

These people are just born sometimes, and it so happened that by around 1500
years after Christ was alive, these people started being born a lot. And when
there was a father that was greatly interested in the topic of "Things that are
discoverable through the process of experimentation", there was almost always a
son that was equally, if not more, interested in such an endeavor. So for a few
generations, these people start to make claims about the universe, claims which
can be verified by experiment. One of the first of these claims was that
"Things tend to go down." In other words, we make a claim about gravity. Of
course, the experiment performed to confirm that hypothisis is that, whatever
you drop always goes in a downward direction. When asked to drop something, it
always goes down, and we have yet to drop something, and have it go up. So the
"downness" of reality is something that we can confirm experimentally.

Of course, over the next couple hundred of years after these scientists (as
they named themselves) really started to refine their statements, and make more
and more fine grained statements about the nature of reality. We had people
like Newton and Liebniz and Kepler and Galelio and many others talking about
the stars, and the measurments they can make on them, and their movements. And
by this point, we have come up with a hypothesis so interesting about the
universe, that it begins to change the way we think about everything.

This hypothesis is that everything is like a bunch of particles, and every
particle is acted on by others, in a way that creates force. Given Newton's
three laws of physics, and given the initial state of a system, you should be
able to predict the locations of all of the particles at a certain time. Of
course, the quality of computaiton did not exist at the time, but their
understanding of something like this being possible certainly was.

So in testing this hypothesis, we ended up with "Newton's three laws of
Physics." These laws enabled us to explain not only the movements of celestial
bodies, which is what they were orriginally made for, but also to predict the
movement of regular objects. This was ground breaking.

So the next year that is really big in this picture I think is somethnig around
2000 years after Jesus was around. Around this time, the humans start to
develop the internet. Through this, all of these ideas, both from science, and
from religion, get placed into one large melting pot, a melting pot fueled by
the opinions of billions of people all around the globe. Something is going to
come out of this melting pot, and we can be sure that whatever it is represents
of major step towards human development.

To people living in this time, there is a whole spectrum of people who believe
just about every thing that you can believe or not believe about Jesus. There
are people who believe he was God, there are people who believe that he was a
prohpet, there are people who don't believe he even existed as a person, there
are people who believe that there probably was a leader named Jesus, but that
the stories about him were made up. Everything you could ever want to believe
or disbelieve about the Jesus story now has a label and a group of people that
follow that label. All of these people exist, and now they are able to talk to
eachother about their different opinions and ideas about things, and out of
this communication comes out a more crystallized view of what the world is.

And I want to be clear, this is 2000 years after jesus was alive in our
hypothetical scenario. I am not describing the current state of affairs, but I
do want to make note of just how strikingly similar our hypothetical omniscient
perspective of the time 2000 years after Christ's actions is to the actual
situation we are in now. Of course, I'm not insinuating that this is how it
happened, but I am merely noting that, regardless of what Christ was, this
outlook on the present moment is very similar to what it could be if we knew
that the "Genetic Christ" was how things actually happened 2000 years ago.

Some time around 2500 years after Jesus was alive, we have developed a view of
the world which is much more refined than it ever has been before. We make some
breakthrough in the way that consciousness is linked to the body, and with this
understand, we open up a whole new world of possiblities. There is a man that
invents a device which you can wear while you sleep that is able to take
recordings of your dreams. Of course, at first the recordings are rough
estimates, but after the device gets propogated for some time, it gets more and
more sophisticated.

Around 3000 years after, humans have become so sophisticated to the point where
each individual human is able to live in harmony with the others, and we are
connected to a point of understanding about eachother where we have systems in
place for people to optimally share thoughts directly from one consciousness to
another. We created a device which is able to take two or more people, and
allow them to share consciousness for a time. At first, the technology is
scary, but as it becomes more refined, it becomes something of a way of living.
In this way, business partners are able to trust and understand eachother, and
enemies are allowed to empathize with other points of view.

By this point, the freak occurance that was Jesus is only remembered as a
fable. The question of whether Jesus was a man, or was he a god, is thought to
be largely irrelevent. It's pretty clear that he was just some sort of man, but
it's unclear just exactly what kind of man he was. We think little of it,
though, similar to the way we think little of whether or not Zeus is the actual
Son of Chronos. There might be select scholars who disagree about certain
texts, and what they might mean for the people that wrote it, but on the whole,
most people will have disinterest in mythologies.

There becomes, however, a new craze of people wanting to share the most
authentic or meaningful thoughts. Because of the lessons we learned about the
internet, we have a way of propogating these thoughts between one another in a
connective way. The more we share thoughts in this way, the better we come to
understand what life itself is like for us.

By the time 4000 years comes by, Jesus is all but forgotten. It's unfortunate
that his mushrooms have all died off, but the truth about it is that we are
really quite unsure exactly what sort of strain of mutation he might have had.
Of course, we have studied many mutations, and we have been able to synthesis
things like all sorts of varieties of magic mushroom, but as far as
understanding Jesus, from the vantage point of 4000 years, we can only make the
best guess.

After this point, it's difficult to say where humanity goes, all though it's
certainly the case that, whatever mutation that allowed jesus to do what he
did has been replicated, and not only that, but every other kind of magic
mushroom that he didn't create has been found to come to life when humans are
given a certain kind of genetic augmentation.

I suppose that is the next thing. Genetic manipulation makes a break through by
the year 4000. We are able to inject dna into others in a non-intrusive and
safe way. In fact, we are able to entirely re-write the human genome. It's a
startling thing to have happen, but it is possible. Eventually, we get good
enough to augment people with the power of activating spores in the ground. Of
course, this is wildly unpractical, since it would be much simpler to get
machines that do that, but these machines require the sample of human dna and
mushroom dna in order to work. But still, they work, and we are able to
systhesize many kinds of mushrooms and other sorts of substances, and we
understand their connection to our own DNA.

By the time 8000 years have gone by, we will have transformed into something
rather unlike human beings. Due to our understanding of genetic manipulaton, we
were able to create stronger, faster, more fit people. It took a long time, but
we were able to get there. It's commonplace for baby's to be treated at birth,
and baby's that aren't have a name. In fact, it becomes an issue of contention
amongst the "unaltered" ones that creates something of a movement. THis
movement, however, does not outlast the tide of genetic research, and by a
certain point, it's considered inhumane not to genetically alter children at
birth.

Due to our understanding of genetic manipulation, we are able to evolve into
something not quite like a human, but at the same time very much a derivative
of what humans were in Jesus time. We get so good at it that, people after they
are born, can go in to have a second genetic re-enhancment. Regulations around
how this is done are extremely strict, but people can rework themselves after
coming to a certain age. It must be done before the frontal lobe is fully
formed.

So now, with these advances, people write about different opinions for in what
way they should be genetically modified. Some advocate for one approach, while
others advocate for a different one. Some people are contentious about this
topic, and it goes so far as to break up lovers because they had a different
opinion about in what way to alter their DNA a second time, but more than
anything, what it does is it creates two main branches of humanity that break
off from our "Homo Sapien" and instead create two sub-branches of the Homo
genus that are in some way fundamentally different.

This creates conflict between the two, but with a lot of diplomacy, they are
able to co-exist. There are processes that go through which determine the
rights of co-species couples, as well as rights for equal treatment of the two
species regardless of upbringing. Of course, the more left-brained species will
want to order everyone into a mutual set of conjoined heirachies, and the
right-brained species would rather have everyone sit at circular tables, and
discuss things communally, but the conflict between these two species creates
something of beast of a government on it's own.

Beyond eight thousand years, it's hard to say in what way this continues. But
again, I must remind the reader, this is taking an omniscient perspective on
this alternate reality, so in this reality, it is truly the case that Jesus was
some sort of miricle worker (he created mushrooms with his hands) but that the
people just didn't know how to express what he was doing. This hyphothetical
scenario is played out, and comes out surprisingly similar to the scenario we
find ourselves in today. Of course, this doesn't mean that this scenario must
have been the way that happened, but instead, what it shows, is that there are
multiple ways of getting to the same location in space and time.

The whole point of this exercise is to show that, whatever Jesus was, it really
does not, and should not change what we understand about him now. The truth is,
in the year 2000, Jesus was a man that lived so long ago that it becomes nearly
impossible to know exactly what he did, and exactly who he was. So we may
hypothesize that he was just a man and that stories that came up about him were
entirely made up, or we could conversely say that he actually is thh son of
god, and that he travelled from the netherworld to absolve us of our sins. The
point is, in either scenario, we are left with what we have today, which is a
whole host of conflicting ideas about exactly who jesus was, without being able
to sort through which ones are true, and which ones are just made up. It's just
the reality of things that happen 2000 years ago.

Because of this, I think it's probably reasonable to say that Jesus wasn't the
divine Son of God. Because if he were, you would think that it would be much
more clear that that is really what happened. We shouldn't have to come up with
all of this satan nonsense to hide the fact that Jesus was the son of God. If
he were the Son of God, he would just let us know, indisputably. Since it is
disputable, I think that it is clear that Jesus isn't God, or if he is, he is
a version of God that isn't capable of making indisputable claims about
himself.

That's all I really want to say. I'm not here to make any sweeping claims about
who Jesus was, or what he represents, all I'm saying is, when you look at all
the ways it could have gone down, a lot of them end up with the situation we
find ourselves in in the 21st century, so it's rather futile to attempt to look
back and speculate. Rather, all we can do is act on the view that seems
congruent with the reality we live, and continue to act with open mindedness
about all things that we come across as we fly helplessly into the future.
