The last is in time, and the time is in last.

There is a meadow in the palm of the skirt.

I really just feel like writting gibberish right now. I don't know why. It
could be because I just woke up too late to get into work, and I am still
feeling the effects of my dreams. I don't know. But I want to write gibberish.

Part of the gibberish I want to write is something like this where I just flow
from one thought to the next and just write it down as the thought happens
without a care in the world about whether or not the thought actually happened
or is happening or will happen or wherever the thought is in it's life cycle of
thoughts. I just want to think about things and write them down. For no reason
at all.

My story is coming along nicely. I like what's happening to my man, and as I
start to continue to get it on paper, I'm really liking where his life is
going.

I had a dream last night, where I was Frodo in the LOTR, but instead of being
one four hundred k novel, it was a whole series of thirteen novels, and I had
only read the intro part of the first one, the teaser trailer, so to speak. It
was interesting, because it reminded me of the Lord of the Rings, but it was a
wholly different sort of story. It's maybe how my brain thinks the Lord of the
Rings should have gone.

There are a couple things that I don't like about the Lord of the Rings, and
also a couple of things that I don't like about Star Wars, both of which I
consider to be great works, but also both of which I feel suffer by having
endings which are not genuine and a little too feel goody.

So lets start with the Lord of teh Rings, since that one is more fresh on my
mind, and I literally just had a dream about it last night.

The frist thing that I don't like about the Lord of the Rings is that the Ring
does not corrupt the wearer very much at all. I understand it's supposed to be
slow acting, and when it's abused for a long period of time, you end up like
gollum where you're this weird little creature underneath the mountains and you
jsut have this whole vibe that's like, "Whoa, this guy is fucked up" about him.
But the thing is, for something as powerful as the ring, I think it should be
much more powerful to the person that has it.

This was represented in my dream. Immediately upon seeing Bilbo, Frodo is
weirded out by his general vibe. He dismisses himself almost immedietaly, and
when he does, he goes out to survey the surrounding landscape, and when Frodo
comes back, Bilbo has a shotgun, and is killing rabits in what I perceived to
be, in that world, a rather inhumane way.

Then, when we returned to the lodge, I could see his face, and it was clearly
demented, taking the form of a sort of demon/ghost, and it was twisted and
warped into a disgusting smile. I demanded the ring from him, and when he gave
it to me, I was allured by it, but placed it into the bath that was there, and
demanded that he come with me outside to scavenge for some food the proper way.

IN the dream also, there was some symbolic shit, where I was pouring some food
we found in crates into a bag, and I remember saying, "I'm going to turn your
world upside down" and I remember thinking, "Wow, this is like symbolic or
something, this is a really great read (in the dream I was reading this story,
and it was playing itself out in front of me) and I remember also thinking that
I wanted to keep reading it because it was quality stuff.

So, I do want to say, the portrayal of the ring in my dream was much more
impactful than the portrayal of the ring in the novel. I don't know to what
extent Tolkien was a dreamer, but the way he wrote in the ring seems to me to
be a consequence of tying it in with the ring from the Hobbit, and because of
that, it takes a much more jolly attitude than it really should. I think that,
since the magic ring from the hobbit also just happens to be the One Ring to
rule them all, and because Tolkien felt that he needed to tie those two stories
together for whatever reason, which doesn't really make since to me, we now
have a portrayal of the ring as something like a fun toy, but a toy that
corrupts you after some number of years of wearing it. This representation does
not really make since if this is truely the ring of Sauron which contains in it
all of the evil deeds and thoughts of all of humanity inside of it. It just
doesn't have that weight in the Lord of the Rings, and it can't because Tolkien
made the decision to tie it in with some trinkit from another story.

So that's my take on that, the ring should be much more dire, and more direct.

One other thing to note is that I'm not a fan of the ending of the Lord of the
Rings. I feel like the Lord of the Rings could have been the first part of a
trilogy. Like, I understand that, since it's not, the Ring being destroyed
neccesarily killed Sauron, and because of that, I suppose the whole orc army
just decided that they didn't want to keep fighting at the black gate, which
doesn't really make since to me, but it's there so what the fuck ever. Still, I
feel like the ring being destroyed, and that solving everything, doesn't really
feel like the right ending. It's like a deus ex machina, except we were given
the deus ex machina from the beginnig of the story. It's weird.

So instead, I think it would make more since if, when Sam and Frodo get to
Mount Doom, Sauron is waiting for them there, and from there, something big and
epic happens. I don't know what. This is one of those things where I have an
idea, and this idea isn't totally fleshed out. I haven't thought too deeply on
this idea, and it's not tottaly there, but it's there, and I think it should
have happenend this way, mostly because that's what I think should have
happened. You see, when they destroy the ring, and that causes all of the
fighting to stop, something seems wrong. It doesn't make sense that such a
thing would cause all of the ranks of Mordor to just stop fighting. It makes
Mordor seem like some weird hellscape where there are only puppets, and when
you kill the puppet master, the puppets all collapse and it's done.

But from what I understand, Mordor wasn't like that. And even if it was, I
don't think it should be. I don't like the idea of Sauron being the evil
mastermind that acts as some sort of central hive mind for an entire population
of people. It doesn't make sense. So instead of that, I would definitely want
the ring and Sauron to just be one part of the whole ordeal. It should be just
one aspect of the story, so that when the ring is destroyed, well, it shouldn't
just end the driving force of the story. THat doesn't make sense. And I
understand that Sauron put a lot of himself into the ring, but also it doesn't
make sense to me that Sauron would die when Frodo destroyed the ring. Perhaps
it would make more since for Sauron to torture Frodo for what he had done after
he had destroyed the ring. That would make more sense.

THe finality of the way Sauron is destroyed I think is pretty poorly done. ANd
the fact that everyone in the story gets a happy textbook ending is also sort
of silly in my book. I get it, I understand why it was done, but I just think
it's wrong.

I suppose my qualms with the ending of the Lord of the Rings is also similar to
my qualms with the ending of Star Wars. The way that Vader just "becomes good
again." at the end of the movie feels so contrived and dumb. It sends a weird
message, like, "When your father becomes a tyrant, he will eventually become
good again, just you wait." It's a weird ending, and doesn't make much sense to
me.

I suppose, I need to make a counter example here as well. The ending to a lot
of tragedies, where literally the entire cast dies at the end, I think, is also
not neccesarily the best ending to a story either. With something like Hamlet,
where tragic things happen, and then everyone dies due to the events that
transpire, it just feels like, I don't know, it's again just too contrived.
It's like, what if Hamlet did something differently at one step. Maybe I
disagree with the motivations of one of the characetres, and now the whole
story doesn't end like that. It doesn't feel right either.

So I think the point is, the ending to a story is not dictated as well done or
poorly done just based upon whether or not it's a stereotypical happy ending or
not. It has more to do with the quality of the story, and whether or not that
ending actually made sense, and flowed out of, what happened to the characters,
and the decisions and choices that they made, and the rules of the univese in
which they live, rather than whether or not the ending is happy or sad.

I'm not really sure where I am going with this. What I guess I want to say is
that, I feel like a lot of stories get their shit wrong.

Let me talk about Get Out for a second here.

So get out had what would be considered a positve ending the way I look at
things. Throughout the whole work, we are in a sense rooting for the main
character to get out of his situation, and as the story goes on, we begin to
learn more and more about stuff.

I actually don't want to write about this anymore.

I sort of want to write about something else.

If there seems like there has been a drastic change in the tone, it's because I
took a long break, and it's now a different part of the day.

I am at work still, and I have some stuff that I should be working on, and I
more or less know how it is going to go, and I'm just not working on it, simply
because I just don't want to. So I don't want to, so instead of working on it,
I am just sitting here and typing out my free form thought.

I did not take a lunch today. When I woke up, which was late as fuck, I didn't
want to wake up, and I knew that I was going to take a nap for lunch today. But
then, I didn't take a nap, and instead, well, I just sat at my desk and
continued working, and browesing reddit, and writting, and things of that
nature. So it works out in the end I suppose.

Regardless, I am not sure what it is that I want to be doing right now. It
seems as though to me that I want to write a story, a story about things and
people and stuff. I could go to my other story and continue writing that,
although I am not feeling particularly inspired by that right now, so I will
pass on that right now. Well, I say I will pass on that, but I'm not sure what
else to write about.

There are things that I could write about. I could write about how I am wirting
right now. The words are coming from my fingers at a pretty decent pace. It's
working, and it's going, and the time is flowing out of my hands. It's sorta
cool.

I could write about how my life feels like something deep is missing. And what
is missing is that father figure. I need someone to admire, to look up to. I
want to work with someone that I respect. I don't have respect, I just have
obligation at my work, and that is the large issue. And the thing is, I don't
think that just changing jobs will change who I respect.

I respect Jason, on some level.

So I want to talk about addiction. Addiction seems to be a rather rampant sort
of thing that is going around now. And I'm not just referring to "the opiod
crisis" or anything like that. I'm talking about our need as humans to have
some outlet with which to occupy ourselves. Perhaps that is nirvanna, is not
having the desire to have anything. But that also sounds like the deepest
depression.

Fuck man, my thoughts are everywhere right now. It's weird how I feel right
now. I feel like this pretty often. It's like, I have thoughts, and they are in
my brain, but they are not able to realize themselves in any way into reality.
It's like, the things I see and feel inside of me just sort of stay there, and
I don't have an outlet with which to express them in a way that feel accurate
or correct in any way. I'm not touching anyone with my ideas, I'm not impacting
anything with what I do. Nothing I do feels like it has meaning, and nothing I
do feels like it really matters to me.

It's a weird thing. I don't really get it. It's like I'm a plug, and I need to
plug into something in order to work, but I'm too afraid to unplug myself
because I've been there before, and my life is too easy to just plug into
something totally arbitrary and meaningless.

Like, I think, meaning has to do with contributing to the lives of others.
Well, something close to that. That is partly because we are social creatures,
and the human is like one cell in the giant super organism that is the world.
But it's something more than that.

Like, if the development of human consciousness is the greatest thing that we
have done so far, then what is the next step? Because it's rather clear to me
that this whole thing that we're doing as humanity, while it certainly has some
sort of historical momentum and flow to it, is not clear to me to be the next
step in figuring out what our place here in the universe is.

I'm not sure where this is going. This is why I don't usually like to have a
free form chain of thought to just get random thoughts out for no reason. The
thoughts don't have a goal, they don't have a purpose. Instead, they are just
there, for themselves, and they just sort of come out, and they exist. It's
like hitting a bunch of random melodies on a piano, and expecting it to come
out as something that sounds like music.

So maybe I should direct my thoughts a little better. I could make an entire
outline of how I would change the Lord of the Rings.

Okay, so lets do this. I'm going to mentally rehearse the Lord of the Rings as
a book, and from the beginning, I'm going to talk about the things that I
really don't like about it.

So the first thing I don't like is the Shire. I understand that it's Tolkiens
sort of wet dream fantasy of a sort of idealistic familiar setting, but it's
really quite insufferable as a place. It's filled with gossip and banter and a
weird fetishistic desire for some sort of "homeliness". It would be an awful
place to live, and to have it as the starting point for both of his adventures
is very uninteresting.

From there, I think that the way that Bilbo has managed to just "have"
something as significant as the one ring of power for as long as he has without
people catching on it is implausible at best. If the one ring is really
something like the essence of Sauron poured into the power of one thing, then
what sorts of rules does it have? Sauron is essentially made out of the spirit
of the universe, one of the primarry drivers of all things in the world, and if
the spirit of Sauron is "poured into it" whatever that means, then wouldn't it
be perceivable by say, I don't know, mother fucking Gandalf, who is also made
out of the spirit and essence of the world? Does it not "radiate" this sort of
vibe or something. Is it really just "a trinket" that has these really long
term negative effects, and in the short term is only something like a toy or
trinket to be played with like a "magic ring?" It's sort of dumb.

So from there, the way all of the hobbits interact with eachother is rather
obnoxious. All of the details about where Frodo goes, and how the hobbits knew
about Frodo's journey, and all of that.

Okay, now I want to talk about the baptismal font in Tom Bombadills house. In
fact, this is something that gets me really quite upset, to a point of
extremism I would say, and has me fuming. It's something that I would say is
the closest thing to the source of many of my pathologies. It's this source
that I can trace back to my anger, my temper, my resentment, depression, all of
these things.

This source is infant baptism.

Infant baptism is really fucked.

It's really hard for me to articulate just how much I absolute loath and
despise this ritual. It genuinely makes me want to punch a baby in it's stupid
baby face. It's the sort of upset that I get when I hear about a woman cheating
on a man and bragging about it, and laughing about it to him. The same level of
disgust and nausea that I feel from the concept of "cucking" someone quite
honestly only pales in comparison to my feelings of absolute hatred I have for
the ritual of infant baptism.

I want to make something clear here. I am not despising this ritual because I
think it has some sort of super natural powers, or anything like that. In fact,
I would say quite the opposite. It's because there are no super natural powers
that it grants you that I despise this ritual. It's the idea that, in some way,
by subjecting children before they have the power to think or make words, or
even make any sense of the world around them, to a ritual which is perceived to
ward of an imaginary evil spirit which is thought to reside in "the
underworld" and that by doing this, you make the child a "child of god" is so
assanine, so ridiculous, and so misguided, that I honestly don't even know what
to say about it.

I suppose the place to start is to talk about reality, and the relationship
that we have with it. You see, regardless of what you would say about what the
word "real" means, or what it means for something to be real, it must be said
that in certain contexts, reality and what it means for something to be real
changes. For instance, you could ask, "Is it true to say that 1+1=2?" and the
correct answer to that question, given that this question isn't being posed
rhetorcially as something epistomological in nature, is very clearly "Yes, that
is true." You could just as easily say, "Well in the sense that numbers are
just a construct that we use to describe the reality that we experience, and
within that construct, that statement you have given is a true statement, under
the claims of arithmetic and boolean logic" but all of that isn't neccesary.

You could then ask questions about whether or not something is real, such as a
table, or the chair you are sitting on, or the coffee you are drinking. And for
these things, again, unless you are asking for some sort of rhetorical reason,
you would say, "Yes, these things are real."

Then there is a question about whether or not the dark side of the moon is
real. You can't touch you can't see it, you can't use your senses to directly
observe or perceieve it, and you most likely never will in this life time
(unless we advance space travel to the point where we create moon resorts, but
that's another topic entirely) but you could say something like, "Based upon
what I have observed, I believe that there is sufficient evidence to say that
the dark side of the moon is real." And someone might retort, and say, "But you
can't touch it, you can't see it, there's no way to know it's real."

At this point, I want to make a distinction. The real answer is, "We only ever
have our experiences of reality, and we never get to touch naked reality or
experience naked reality in any way. So while we say that the glass we hold in
our hands is real, what we are actually saying is that the experience of the
glass leads us to believe with rather strong conviction that the glass we are
holding in our hands is real. You can make claims about things like the brain
in the vat experiment, and you can argue that it's truely impossible to know
whether or not anything is real, or whether or not our lives are simply the
grandest of illusions, but at the end of the day, what we are saying is, we
have a way of defining a certain kind of reality that is related to our
experiences and how our experiences interact with our understanding of how the
world works.

So it's at this point that we need to talk about reality. You see, this is a
tricky thing, because, as I said, we can never really talk about reality.

But the thing about it is, what we would like to do is have a level of
understanding reality which aligns ourselves with the actual nature of reality.

Or in other words, believing in something doesn't make it true.

I suppose what I am trying to get at is this.

All we have in our lives is our experience. Now, this experience, this feeling,
the inner as I have called it, it's like a signal, and like any signal, if you
have no way to process it, it is literally just noise. Now, humans know nothing
about where the signal comes from, but most of us have a pretty strong
conviction that the signal comes from "the world" or "reality."

I'm not saying that there aren't other ways to interpret and attempt to
understand where it is that signal comes from, but most humans I would say,
especially those that don't think about it, would say, "I am a person inside of
a body that resides on the planet earth" or something like that. Essentially,
what is behind a statement like that is the notion that there is a "universe"
that exists regardless of our perception of, and then there is "what we
perceive."

So now, this is taken as a given for everyone. We have this notion that there
is a "reality" and that "we" (whatever "we" means) interact with it in our
lives. Again this entire idea is not our most fundamental given, but it
suffices for this disscussion.

So now, at this point, the average human being would say that, when you
experience reality, you are seeing the naked reality. But when you see a glass,
it's possible that you might not be seing a glass. There are all sorts of
tricks that artists and magicians and other such types can use to trick the
mind into seeing something that isn't real. I'm reminded of those sidewalk
chalk drawing which, when viewed from one angel, look like they collapse into
the ground, but when viewed from another, look like a really distorted 2-d
image of what used to look like a bottomless pit. So in this case, you would
say, "I thought it was a hole, but really it was just chalk on concrete." It's
the "really" that's the key word here. So people understand, whether they
realize it or not, that there is a difference between reality and their
perception of reality.

Now, it turns out, and a lot of people haven't thought about this or don't care
to think about this, that everything we experience is simply "perception of
reality." What is happening is, when we perceive reality, those perceptions go
through our brain, and based upon our past experiences, and based upon how our
brain is wired up, we interpret that perception signal in some way. In the case
of the chalk drawing, we percieve it as a hole in the ground. In the case of
the glass, we perceieve it has a glass in the hand.

So what I am getting at is, we would like to, as best we can, have a method of
perceiving reality in as close a way to "what is really real" as we can. If we
could percieve that chalk drawing and look at it from the deceptive angle, but
be able to know regardless that it is simply chalk on the sidewalk, that would
be preferable to continuing to believe that there is truly a hole in the
ground. We would rather have a model of reality which matches what reality
actually is.

Now at this point it gets tricky, because I have skipped a point here. I used
the term "what reality actually is" and the truth is that we don't and can't
know what reality "actually is". We never get to touch naked reality. But we
can rest assured simply knowing that we are using a sort of jump in thought. We
are making up an "actually is" for the purpose of being able to explain what we
are doing in a way that doesn't require verbal gymnastics. Well, we are still
using verbal gymnastics, but this cuts down on it some.

In fact, the better way to say this is that, we would like to be able to create
a model of reality which matchs as best it can our perception of reality.
That's the better way of doing it.

So in this way of thinking, we would say that the idea of something being
"really there" is what we would call our model of reality, and then the more
our perceptions matchs with what we think is "really there" the more convicted
we are that that is what is "really there"

So enough verbal shenanigans, what I'm saying is this. We have a way of talking
about reality in terms of what is "really there," but that is the version of
reality that we use to talk about the objective world. It turns out, we have
another way of talking about something be "real" or "true" that operates at a
different level.

To give an example of this, let's ask "what color is Santa's coat?" It's
obviously red.

But now you say, "AHA! I got you. Santa isn't "really real" so there is no way
that his coat is red. There is no Santa, so therefore there is no Santa's coat!
It was a trick question!"

And it's at this point that we draw the distinction between realities. You see,
human's have an amazing capacity to tell and retell stories. And when we talk
about stories, we talk about them as if they are real. We use a different way
of talking about reality when we talk about stories. We can even talk about how
"realistic" a story is, or in other words, we can judge the degree to which a
story represents reality in a favorable way. We have a whole category of
stories like this, fiction, which attempts not to be real, but instead, to tell
something of a story that represents a different kind of reality.

So it's in this way that we can say something like "Santa isn't real, but his
coat is red."

Such a statement is absurd if we only take the "really real" approach to
reality. But now we have a different way of talking about real, the "reality of
the fiction"

To say it that way is something of a misnomer, and honestly, people don't
much ever talk about fiction like that. They will usually just talk about
fiction, and we are assumed to be operating in the fictional world.

But the point is, this is another way that people will create a model of what
is real. Their perception will be whatever story telling means feeds into them,
whether it's verbal word, written word, some other form of art like movies or
tv shows, and then the model of reality is then the images and feelings that
form when the individual exposes themself to that fiction.

So now, this is my tripe with infant baptism. It seems very clear to me that
the bible, and Christianity, is a fiction. In other words, in the similar way
that I can say that something like the dark side of the moon exists, not
because I have seen it with my eyes, or been there, or anything like that, but
because I would say, based upon my experiences with the world, and based upon
my gathered evidence and rational judgement on the issue, it seems to me that
creating a model of reality where the dark side of the moon exists would most
closely resemble what is "really real", in that same way, I would say that
something like God does not exist, because the model of the universe where God
exists is far enough removed from what would match my perception of the world
that it seems wise and tenable to me to say that there must be some other
explanation for what the universe is and how it came into being.

Now that was a mouthful to get out, but I think it's really important. It's
also really important to understand the distinction between the two, and not to
ever discount one for the other. In fact, I believe that it is the human's
capacity to share and tell stories that has allowed us to evolve to the point
that we have, and it's quite possibly the most important thing that we have in
order to reach something of a level of what we might consider the
"trancendent", so I would argue that it's vitally important that we never
discount a deep and meaningful story as "merely fiction" because we do so at
our peril.

But, that being said, to try and distort something which is a fiction, and to
lie and trick and decieve others into thinking that the fiction, no matter how
profound or meaningful it is, is osmething other than that, fiction, to pretend
that a fiction is, in a way which it is clearly not, "really real," is to me
the greatest rape of what is good and true in the world that humanity has ever
done.

And can you blame us for this rape? We are the first species to understand
story, can you really fault us for raping it in this way? Maybe, maybe not, but
I think it's imporatant to see it for what it is, and that is utter violation
of the relationship between reality and fiction. It is rape.

And that is why I find infant baptism so disgusting. It is rape in it's most
raw form. The rape of a child. It's the continual acting out of a fiction that
is used by those that would benefit so greatly from it being real that they
blind themselves to their touch with the world, and perpetuate this disgusting
ritualistic acting in order to propogate the claim that their fiction is in
some way "really real," and that by doing this they are giving some sort of
holy or supernatural significance to something which is very clearly not
"really real".

So that is why I find infant baptism so disgusting. It's not because I think
there is any special significance to it that I find it so disgusting, it's
because there isn't any special significance to it, but it's presented as if
there is. And with that percieved signifgance, a child is brought into the
world with this entirely incorrect notion of what his/her relationship should
be with reality is. Before the child can feel or touch or perceive, he is
brought into the world with a warp, demented view, of what the relationship
with reality should be.
