I just finished right now with type racer, and I got exactly sixty words per
minute average across ten overall races.

I have also decided that I want to change something about the way the keyboard
types. I have changed the settings in windows ease of access center to turn on
"Filter Keys". What this does is prevent a held down keypress to press again
multiple time. Instead, it will just be registered as a single keypress, and it
won't be pressed again until it is released and re-depressed.

I am observing the consequences of this choice, but so far it seems to be about
the same as before. I think the whole point of doing something like this would
be that I can more easily fall into the keys, and bottom them out like a
motherfucker, and that it's totally cool if that happens, because there is no
risk of ever accidentally zooming through the whole alphabet if I accidentally
rest my finger at the bottom of the "G" key or something ridiculous like that.

I don't think that it will really change anything when it comes to actual free
writing and free typing. I will still have just as much trouble as I have in
the past coming up with ideas of things to write about, and also I will still
have trouble in coming up with the things that I actually feel inspired to
write about and go in detail about in every moment. But the point here is that
if I'm able to practice like this, and even if changing my settings to put
filter keys on is only a placebo to more streamlined typing, then so be it.
Give me the placebo, baby.

That being said, I don't know what it is that I want to continue to free write
about. Currently, I am at work, and I have some responsibilities to attend to
as a professional. As I said, I have spent most of the day so far playing
typeracer, and I am currently spending part of the day also writing in my free
writing journal, but with all of that, I still feel obligated to report to my
regular duties as a member of the development team at Alliant Systems.

All of that being said, there are something like maybe five cases that are
currently not in testing yet, and only three of those don't have programmers
attached to them, and it's very early on friday morning, and the build is due
by the evening, so we are well on track to finishing up our portion of the
work.

That being said, I would feel better if I started working on this four hour
case that I have to finish and got to a point where I was confident that I at
least knew how to tackle the case without interfering with management or with
the person who created the case.

I am fairly certain that the data we have for this case might be old, at which
point I will have to construct the data myself and pray that I am able to
reproduce what happens in the before proof. Let us just hope that I am able to
get data that does what it needs to do.

9:27

Okay, so I want to do some freewriting to get some steps in order for this
case.

The first thing I want to do is describe the case, and what it entails.

So what is happening in this case is this. When there is an invoice, and this
invoice has a designer program line, and this designer program is set to
dp_recalc, and the line is shown to the mobile user, and the mobile user goes
to the credit button on the line and attempts to credit the line, the line is
not credited when it should be. This will only happen if the route option
raRoute.rt_no_credit_InvLine is off.

So the first thing I need to do is find a database with designer programs on
invoices. Ideally, I would be able to find a designer program line that is
already set to dp_recalc. If I can't do that, then I might have to set up an
invoice with a dp line for a particular dp. Let's hope it doesn't come to that.

10:10

Okay, so I am nearing the point where I believe I have some test data that I
would think does the thing that is shown in the proof. If that is the case,
then I will be greatly on my way to making a change in Alliant Mobile that
fixes this issue.

I don't understand why the retrieve process is so slow suddenly. It's as if by
changing a setting, I turned on a loop that iterates through and makes every
operation one hundred times slower. It's excruciating.

12:56

Okay, so I am back from lunch. Lunch has turned more in to two hours than one
hour, but I don't feel too bad about it. After all, if I cut my lunch shorter,
there is absolutely no garuntee that my day will become any more productive. In
fact, I would argue that because I take two hours for lunch, my days are
generally more productive, or so I like to tell myself.

So right now, I have gotten to the point where I have recreated the error which
occurs for this four hour case. I have narrowed down the options involved. The
next step to do is to investigate the option dp_recalc when canceling a line
item. I must find somewhere where that option is interering with the credit
process. I imagine that there is a generalized function which is doing the
recalculating, and since it is doing that, I imagine what is happening is that
the adjustment quantity is getting automatically adjusted back to it's original
value after that particular invoice line is credited.

If that is the case for what is happening (and for now let's suppose that it
is, because I don't want to work on it right now and instead I want to keep
typing words like I am doing right now) then what I am going to need to do is
find a way to call the "do recalculations" function in a way that keeps track
of whether or not a certain designer program should in fact be recalculated.

It would not make sense to change anything about the designer programs table
(which is pulled down as a pull_table, by the way) is set, so I can think of
another option to get this to work.

Something to think about is that, if the user credits a dp line, and then goes
on to adjust more things on the invoice, should the dp line recalc? I think the
answer is no. So perhaps, what should happen is that, when an adjustment is
made, if the dp_line adjustment quantity is not zero, and also if the dp_line
adjustment amount is equal to the additive inverse of the transaction amount,
then we can say that the line should not be recalculated. In every other
instance, it should be.

So there are two concepts at work here. The first is in recalculting a dp_line
based upon its adj and trn amounts, but also the second concept is the concept
of changing the way we think about adjustments.

I have a suspician, though, that if we make the fix so that designer programs
flagged for recalc that have an adjustment ammount as the negative of the
transaction amount, then we will have fixed the problem of creditting a dp_line
in the first place.

It still might be nice to double check ourselves though.

2:22

Okay, so it seems as though we are at a point now where I simply have to make
some changes to the way credit's are handled for recalculating designer
programs, and I am able to do that, then all of the changes that need to be
made will get made.

I just want to take a moment here to talk about how proud I am of the idea to
check if the adjustment quantity is the inverse of the quantity. Because, the
way we perform a credit, we just simply set the adjustment quantity to the
other quantity but backwards, so that when we add them together for the grand
total total, we get the exact number that we want in the end.

So with all of that being said, I can definitively say that I am no longer
interested in talking about work at all anymore. Instead, I would like to talk
about whatever random shit that comes to me mind. This could be consisdered
freewriting practice. I can write about whatever comes to my mind, and expand
on things in whatever way I see fit.

something I want to do, that I have been meaning to do, is to go over the full
outline of my Seth and Cain story. Of course, to just lay it out as a tabular
list would suffice, but it would also be boring. Something like that compresses
so much information into so tiny of a space, that if you're not careful, the
information that you want to capture can get corrupted, warped, or ommited, and
I don't want that to happen. So instead what I am going to do is explain the
outline to someone, as if they were genuinely curious about what it is that I
was writing about.

So, in order to work myself in to the mindset, I think the first thing that we
must remind ourslevs of is that this Seth and Cain story is something of a
psychological experiment. As I mentioned in the preamble, this story is not
meant to be an accurate retelling of anything, and in inconsistency that it has
with the biblical story is either incidental or intentional.

So with that being said, let's start again at the beginning.

Before the story begins, Adam and Eve have some sort of ordeal which later
becomes known as the story of the garden of Eden.

After the story of the Garden of Eden, we want to talk about the brother Cain.
He was born, and he grew up with Eve. Then, when he was a teenager, he went on
an extended pilgramage, and when he returned, he found Abel to be his brother.

I think I like the version of the story where Abel does not go on a pilgramage,
and instead becomes dedicated to his father. That works best psycholgically, I
think.

So then, of course, is the slaying of Abel by Cain. There are many ways that
this section of the story could be written, but again, all that we need to know
at this point is that it happened here.

After this, Cain was sent into exile. In exile, we could describe what happened
to him.

After some years, he eventually makes a life for himself, and becomes an able
bodied human again.

In the mean time, Adam and Eve went immediately to produce a third child, this
time naming him Seth.

Our story begins with a quick statement about how the story begins. The story
is written in the third person, from an omniscient perspective, but we are not
an omniscient narrator. In other words, the narrator is omniscient of the
present, but not of the past or the future.

As far as laying out the life of Seth, I have two sections which deal with
stories, first from the perspective of his mother, then from the perspective of
his father. I want to outline the idea that both his mother and his father have
corraboratted their stories with one another, but each has their own specific
ideas about exactly how certain things happened.

So that is the first two sections. The first section is Eve telling Seth about
the Garden of Eden.

This version of the Garden of Eden I would say is as close to the canonical one
that I can get to, while still including the concept of the mushrooms. I
actually really like how this part has turned out.

The second section will then be a similar section, but instead of Eve, this
time it is Adam, and instead of the Garden of Eden, it is Cain and Abel. Again,
this is the closest thing that we are going to get to a canonical version of
the story.

In the case of this story, I do not have material like Paradise Lost on which
to draw a detailed version of the sequence of events, but what I do have is my
imagination, and I can pretend as though there is some definitive work similar
to Milton which outlines what happens between Cain and Abel. This section, of
Adam explaining what happened to Seth, would be as close to that canonical
version as I can get.

The next part of the story I want to be in the present. Since we have had two
"story telling sessions" so far, I want to show the reader that this story is,
indeed, a story in itself, and that I do intend to present some orginal
material.

This part of the story is mostly about Seth's pilgramage, followed by Seth and
Cain meeting in the swamp. The first have of this third section concludes with
Seth meeting a stranger, and then we slowly learn that the stranger is, much as
we are not surprised at the outcome, Cain.

I want to write it like this because, even if the reader knows that the
stranger is going to be Cain, I want to make it clear that Seth, while he may
have been wary of such a thing, has such a perverted idea of what his brother
Cain probably looks like, thinking that he is some sort of demon or devil, that
he doesn't even think that this could be him.

In the current version of what I have written, I have not gotten to the point
where I elaborate on Seth's expectations. Regardless of how it's done, I want
the point to be made that Seth has some pre-conceived notion about what Cain
should be like.

After the whole introductions, the fourth section comes to a point where Cain
describes the story of Cain and Abel to Seth. It's at this point that the
reader learns that Cain also went on a pilgramage, that he learned something on
that pilgramage, and then we go over again, but this time from Cain's point of
view, the tragedy of Cain and Abel.

For this fifth section, it will pick up from the end of the Cain and Abel
story. There are many ways that this first part of the fifth section could go,
but the most extreme case is that Seth continues to accuse Cain of being a
devil, but Cain uses logic to convince Seth that he is not.

I don't like spelling all of that out explicitely, but something here about the
fact that Seth no longer thinks that Cain is the devil is appropiate.

The second part of part five would then be Cain detailing out his exile. This
would talk about his initial wanderings, followed by his re-integration in to
living life.

The final section I want to be about Cain's pilgramage. I want him to talk
about the mushrooms that he found and ate, and it's at this point that I want
to talk about God, and Yahweh, and what all of those things might mean to Cain.

To finish it, I want Seth to put together the pieces that, although Cain is
saying great things, I want him to, after questioning Cain deeply on his
philosophies, to concede that, even if he absolutely disagrees with Cain on the
specifics of how he sees the world, I want Cain to hit the point home that the
way he wants to come to understand the world is from a point of constantly
learning and understanding the sensations and experiences around himself as
they are.

I'm not sure if I want dialogue that involves Seth reasoning for Cain to come
back with him to the farm. I like the idea of Cain reasoing with Seth about why
he can't return to their parents, but at the same time, I think it's a little
insulting to the character of Seth to have him ask such a naive question.

Still though, I might find some excuse to squeeze something like that in there.

After that, I want to have something of a short epilogue. I want to mention
that Seth concluded his pilgramage, never told his parents that he met Cain,
and proceeded to marry his sister and have a family of his own. I also want to
mention briefly that Cain marries someone also (I'm not sure who, especially
not in my extended mythological universe.) and that bloodline of Cain wandered
far before becoming extinct entirely.

I just looked it up, and the bible doesn't even mention who Cain's wife was, or
who Seth's wife was, so I suppose I can just make up a version.

