So today, I want to begin to talk about all of the things that are on my mind
when it comes to my life ordeals.

So firstly, I have just yesterday now talked to the front desk of the people at
my apartment, and I have officially declared my intention to move out. That
will take place two months from now.

In the mean time, on the top of my priority list is shopping for new
apartments. There is a part of me that doesn't want to get an apartment at all,
and instead just wants to live in my Honda fit for the rest of my days, but
alas, that is not to be.

So, with that all being said, I need to be able to come up with a way of
evaluating the apartments I come across. I want to think about this in one of
two ways.

The first way is that I could think about each apartment as it's own unit, list
it's pros and cons, and see which ones have the most pros and the least cons.

The other way is to list off all of the things that I don't like about my
current apartment, and make sure I find an apartment that has the opposite of
those things.

Of course, the first approach is better even though the un-enlightened soul
would say differently.

So, let us begin the first approach. Let me begin listing some things that are
required for a new apartment.

    - Washer and Dryer
    - Wood or otherwise hard floors
    - Spatious kitchen area with nice counters/cabinets, modern appliances and so forth
    - Tall shower/large tub
    - Open feeling (not congested)
    - Faces East with natural lighting
    - Balcony view
    - Nearby to park
    - Location

So far that seems like a good start for some search items.

Of course, from here, all that needs to be done is that I need to walk in to
these places and tour them.

Also, I feel that no matter how hard I try, this list will be swayed by what I
am currently dissatisfied with in my current apartment. To point those items
out specifically, they are

    - Short shower
    - Dirty carpets.
    - Old, cramped kitchen.
    - Faces west

Actually, now looking at it, I pretty much have none of these things in my
current apartment, except the washer and dryer (and imagine if I opted out of
that choice)

So, to list some things that I currently like about my apartment, that I would
like to look for again in a new apartment.

    - Accesable parking.
    - Quiet neighbors

Honestly, there is not much that I particularly care for in my current
apartment.

I want to tell a little bit of an anecdote which came to me in this moment,
which I find humourous.

So, a few days ago, when I was still focusing deeply on my anxiety, and
standing by the pond, and attempting to meditate as best I could, I started to
look around, and think about how strange it is that I was becoming accustomed
enough to this place to begin to develop habits and patterns around it, but
before that could fully happen, I was deciding to move to somewhere else.

In that moment, I caught myself thinking about how little problems I have with
my current apartment. There has been relatively little maintainence, the
neighbors are nice, no one bothers me, and so forth. Then, as I was meditating
there, I looked across the lake, as I do sometimes, and I looked at the path
that went by the lake, but on the other side. Now, I have seen this path
before, and I have seen people on this path before, but for some reason in my
head I had this path as an entirely different part of my living space then
anywhere else. For instance, any time I go for a jog, I go on a seperate path
from this, around the golf course.

So, as I was having this moment of nostalgia for this place which I was having
anxiety for moving out from, I suddenly realized as I looked across the pond
that the path on the other side connected to Royal lane, the street which my
apartment sits, and makes a nice little loop. On top of that, this loop is
probably smaller than the loop I had run before by probably exactly enough to
make it a "step lower" distance to run.

Suddenly, I find myself meditating there, thinking about how long I have lived
there, and how long I have seen this path across the pond, and how long I could
have been utilizing this path that I haven't. And, on top of it all, now that I
made this discovery, I only made it in the wake of moving out, so now, I will
have made this find which will only gain one or two uses at most.

I have yet to run on this path.

I just find it interesting, sitting here now, objectively writing out all of
the things that I dislike about my apartment, and how, probabilistically
speaking, any apartment I find will be better than the one I currently have,
that still, in that emotionally charged (or heightened sensitivity, rather)
moment, I felt as though I were commited to "her" and that I must absolutely
stay.

