So last night, I know I had some dream fragments, and I remember that they had
to do with going on a trip, getting in a plane, and things of that nature, but
I don't remember the exact details of what went down in the dreams, and I can't
recreate them here unfortunately. So I am now, at this point, sitting here, at
my desk, with nothing to write, and everything to not write.

Well, I say that, it is currently in the mid afternoon, and I'm in the sort of
position where you could say that I really don't know what I need to do with
the Alliant Online blue chip report nonsense. Well, it's not really nonsense,
but I am working on this shit, and I am struggling with the ASPX files and the
html and the css and all of that nonsense, and with every line of code a write,
or attempt to write, I want to blow my brains out. It's really quite obnoxious,
and quite honestly, I'm to the point where I would rather be fired over this
than continue on with it.

Okay, so of course that's not true, I would not like to be fired, but god damn
if I don't hate everything about web development and everything that goes with
it. It's quite possibly the worst aspects of the worst parts of all the things
t hat I don't like about computer science, and all of the parts which I do like
about it are wrapped up in these miniscule little detail things, where
evyrthing interacts with everything else and I just simply don't want to look
at it any more or interact with it any more. It feels as though every time I
make a change, it either does the thing I want it to do, but not in the way I
want it to do it, or it does nothing when I think it should do something. Lets
rewrite that sentance again. Every time I make a change, one of two things
happens. Either I don't think the change should effect something in any way,
and then it does, or I make a change that I think should effect the thing in
some way, and it doesn't. It's the most frustrating sort of nonsense bullshit
to have to deal with in computer science. It's one of those things where in
order to do something like resize a column, you can't just simply say something
like, "column.resize(x, y)" and expect the "resize" function to actually resize
the column. Or maybe, you can expect it to resize the column, but not in the
way that you expect something named "resize" to actually work.

Now, of course, the function, "column.resize" doesn't actually exist, but I am
just using this sort of example to illustrate the point that I don't like doing
this, and I am getting frustrated to the point where I would rather continue on
writing like this rather than go back to working on this piece of shit
bullshit.

I am also tired. Last night, I watch an episode of the Oriville. It was S02E10,
and I can give my commentary on it later, but suffice to say for the time being
that I started the episode at around 9:30, so it finished around 10:30, and
from there, it was maybe another 30 minutes before I could go to sleep. I then
proceeded to sleep for a full 9 hours straight, meaning when I woke up it was
already 8:15 and I had to get out of bed and rush out the door.

This isn't helped by the fact that I am rather dry right now and I am waiting
for my dealer to get back to me on what sort of supply he might have. This is
something that I truly despise about the current state of cannabis in Texas. I
smoked some of the resin off of my pipe last night, and as I was doing that, I
thought about how much healthier it would be for me if the whole thing were
legalized. Because if it were legal, I wouldn't be using paperclips to scrape
off the last bits of burnt resin from my bowls and smoking them out of the
bottom of my pipe. I simply wouldn't do that. In fact, I might clean my pipe
more often if it were the case that it were legal, just because I enjoy the
sensation of smoking fresh bud from a fresh glass pipe. It feels good, and it's
an experience that I don't get to have very often because I want to have the
resin in my pipe.

I could go on about this, but I'm not going to. The point is, I slept quite a
bit last night, and I am still tired now. And not only am I tired, but I am
somewhat irratiable now because I am coming down from the highs and I don't
want to.
