So last night I had a couple of dreams. They were both related, both of which
contained my younger brother Kyle making some questionable desicions about the
people with which he fraternized.

So the first dream starts in a sort of open outside area. I am there, and I am
listening to Kyle talk about different groups of people. He has them divided up
into North, Northeast, Southeast, South, and West. I want to say he had them in
six groups, but the only groups that come into play are the North and
Northeast.

I am listening to him talk about this, and I say, "Yeah, well it's sort of
arbitrary how you're drawing the lines with this, it's not really something
that is so easily demarcated. He retorts that it is indeed something that is
demarcated, and tells me that he can prove it. I agree.

What his plan is is to gather people from the North, and the Northeast, and the
rest of the groups, and to show them a magic trick with cards, and based upon
the trick he would show that people are indeed segregated into groups like
this. In the dream, he just hands me a deck of cards, and tells me to sort
them, and by this action I more or less understand what he is attempting to do.

So he hands me a deck of cards, and I begin to sort them while he gathers
people from the North, and then the Northeast.

As I am sorting the cards, I realize two things about the deck that has been
handed to me. In it, there are a lot of cards which aren't playing cards, cards
that must be weeded from the deck if it is to be a legitimate deck of cards.
The second thing I begin to realize about the deck is that it isn't a full set
of 52 playing cards, and that it's really closer to the high 20s or low 30s in
card count. I alert Kyle to these two facts, and he is noticably concerned, but
says that the trick can work anyway. I can see that he is thinking through how
the trick will work.

Anyway, as Kyle finishes gathering about a dozen or so people, about eight from
the North and five from the northeast, the people start to talk to him. They
grow impatient, and they want to see the trick Kyle is talking about. Kyle then
grabs a portion of the deck from me. IT was a part of the deck that had been
put asside because I was using something of a quicksort algorithm, and so that
portion had already been sorted. Kyle says, "I'm sorry, but I'm going to have
to use this portion of the deck, you're going to have to resort the entire
thing when I hand it back to you." I retort, and I say, "No, leave it sorted if
you can, because when I get it back I can do a merge with it and the existing
deck. That will speed up the sorting considerably."

Kyle then takes that portion of the deck. At this point, with Kyle and the
Dozen or so people, we are outside of an array of ultimate fields, on the other
side of a concrete wall. I somehow know that there is ultimate being played on
the other side even though I can't see it. Kyle then begins his trick.

When Kyle begins the trick, we get transported to the bay house.

Before he totally begins, though, he starts to ask for donations. I offer up a
considerable donation of fifty (fifty of what, I do not know) but as Kyle
continues doing the trick, everyone there donates continuously through the
process, ranging of donations from one to five to ten. Again, ten of what, I
do not know, but they are donating.

After Kyle finishes the trick, the people disperse, and return to their areas.
This entire episode, Kyle thought, while incomplete and not entirely
convincing, especially not in waking moments, demonstrated his point that
people are segregated in the way that he was talking.

That was the extent of that dream.

The next dream might as well extend from this one. A sentence such as "We were
then magically transported to my parents house" would fit here, but I don't
remember that happening. Regardless, the dream begins in my parents home.

This is one of those dreams where there is a lot of interplay between who shows
up where, with small conversations and dramatics shifts in the state of things
at that time, so I won't be able to say too much about exactly what happens,
but I do have the jist of it.

So Kyle mentions that he wants to bring one of his friends over. Our parents
are gone, so we have the house to ourselves, and he thinks it would be fun to
have them over. I say that I don't think it's a good idea, and would rather
just chill, but that if he trusts his friends to be chill, then I don't mind
it.

So he invites his friend, and his friend insists to Kyle that he bring his
girlfriend as well. Kyle agrees, and they both come over.

At first, they are pretty cool, but then I remember his girlfriend going into
the back to snort some cocaine. It was at this point that I began to object.
Kyle apologized, but insisted that it wasn't that big of a deal. I think what
happens is that we talk about it, and she agrees that it is over the line, and
that she won't do any more cocaine.

He then invited another one of his friends over, who also brought his
girlfriend. While we were all hanging out in the living room, both the
girlfriends go to the back room to do cocaine again. I don't remember all of
the interactions, but it was around this point that I was strongly objecting to
having these friends over. I just wanted to chill, but instead these girls are
all doing cocaine.

I remember at around this point in the dream, our parents come home, and see
the cocaine and everything. They are taken aback, and I agree with them,
saying, "I know, right, I was telling you this is ridiculous." Kyle, meanwhile,
has his tail between his legs trying to explain himself.

The last dream that I remember was a fragment. I go to a golf course, and I
approach the last green from the back side, and I am next to a tree on the left
side, the tree is in the way, and I tee up the ball with a nine iron to try and
land it on the green. My dad is there, and he is sizing up my abilities. I try
the first shot, and it's all right, but then I try another shot, and it lands
on the green rather squarly.
