# Charles' thoughts on Realism

I think we must remember nominalism is a direct reaction to a particular kind
of realism, that of the medieval European philosophers, and that nominalism is
definitely a skeptical stance coupled with its own dogmatism ("No, you can't
prove the existence of the forms/ideas, so we should  abandon that theory.
[that's the skepticism/doubt], and when we use names for things that's all they
are, is names for things." [that's the dogmatism]).   It seems to me that
things have natures for sure, but as Plato acknowledged they are very hard to
talk about.  And for Aristotle the forms were dynamic things esp in biological
creatures.  Supposedly -- can't find the quote now -- after the discovery of
DNA some philosopher or scientist said, "We finally found Aristotle's forms".
We just "see" them (the mind sees them), everywhere.  It's how we're able to
make sense of the diversity of the universe.  Stars are stars.  Horses are
horses.  Water is water.  Even numbers are even numbers.  It's just exceedingly
problematic to define precisely how the individual things sharing a "form" or
"nature" relates to other things allegedly with the same form or nature and
then how such a form is perceived by the mind of the observer.  It's all very
problematic.  But I finally figured out, "Problematic doesn't mean something
doesn't exist.  We just don't know how to explain it to our satisfaction."
Because the rationalists believe, as Hegel said, that "the rational _alone_ is
real".  (gee whiz, what a claim). But note they go even farther, and Hegel's
positions ends up meaning is "What is rational _to me_ is real".  So basically
if it doesn't make sense to you it doesn't exist.  To me, nominalism of one of
many such conclusions.  The explanation for a particular development of
"realism" finally broke down under the questions and collapsed into skepticism
about them: Ockham's nominalism.

I think humans should have a rather mystical view of our experience of reality.
It's baffling, almost magical.  We're performing some incredible feat of
cognition, but we are pretty ignorant of how we do it.  Just sitting back and
observing a tree or a pool of water can be kind of mind-blowing.  We should
accept and enjoy the mystery of our perception of the "forms", or whatever they
are.

# My reaction to this idea
So after reading this over a couple of times to get the idea of exactly what is
being said, I think the first thing that I feel so inclined to say is that I
suppose I don't agree with the view of nominalism (as it's presented here), nor
do I agree with the view of realism. Both of these ways of seeing the world,
while they are both coherent in some sense, seem to me to both be incomplete
methods of perceiving our existance.

I think this is summed up nicely near the beginning, when talking about the
dogmastism of nominalism.

> "No, you can't prove the existence of the forms/ideas, so we should  abandon
> that theory.  [that's the skepticism/doubt], and when we use names for things
> that's all they are, is names for things."

Such a view of the world is of course, some what silly. To abandon a theory
because we can't prove it absolutely would be an absurd way to live our lives.
Notwithstanding the philosophical question of whether or not there is ever
such a thing as an "absolute theory" that governs everything, and regardless of
your stance on that front, there are most certainly things in life that are
worth pursuing even if they do not have an absolute grounding.

For instance, music could be said to not exist. Similar to math, you can say
music is nothing more than a series of pitches and rythyms put together in a
coherent way. It would be nonsense to talk about the "absolute sense" of
something like a piece of music. No piece of music will ever be totally
complete. There will always be a way to play it differently, and this different
method of playing can be contrasted and compared to the first to get a more
complete understanding of the totality of the piece of music. But to talk about
some absolute sense of a composed piece of music, I think everyone can agree,
is silly.

So to disregard Realism because it's not absolutely provable, I think everyone
should agree, is silly. Mind you, we might disregard the theory for other
reasons, but absolutism is not one of them.

I am also perplexed by this rather strange quote from Hegel.

> Because the rationalists believe, as Hegel said, that "the rational _alone_
> is real".

I disagree with this characterization of Rationalists. I do not know the
context behind when it was orginally made, and while it can be the case that
some who would call themselves rationalists would make this claim (the "asshole
athiest" comes to mind), I think to attempt to make any claim about one theory
being absolutely correct is rather clearly misguided. I think having a
view of the world where rationality, along with other modes of seeing the
world, each play their respective roles would lead to the greatest
understanding of how we should reason about our lives.

So I think this is where the "Realism vs Nominalism" debate I think becomes
another one of those question like "Free Will vs Predestination" or
"Evolution vs. Intelligent Design", in the sense that these questions are so
designed because they don't have answers, and attempting to find an answer
requires arguing back and forth indefinitely towards no conceivable end.

So with questions like this, I believe it is better to step back and rethink
what we are doing here. I think, especially in the case of something like
"Realism vs Nominalism" we need to ask ourselves a bigger question, and that
question is, "Why are we constraining ourselves to only two ways of looking at
the world?"

To clarify, I would say that I suppose on some level it makes sense to me that
these two would be placed inside an isolated arena, and told to battle it out.
This seems like the classic matchup of opposing ideas, and to see which of the
two would come out on top would be to the plesure of every enthusistic debate
fan.

But I think it's silly to think that we've narrowed down our understanding of
reality to "one theory or it's opposite." I would say that a much more complete
view of how we should view the world would be to take things we experience, and
place them through one perspective of understanding or another until we come
upon an understanding of what happens to us which is congruent with our
experiences and also helps us understand what is going on to us.

To make this abstract idea more concrete, let's use a real example. Take, for
instance, the example of composing music that I gave earlier.

Perhaps I am a composer, and one day when I am meditating, a totally new theme
comes in to my head. I write the theme down, and begin to play with it, seeing
how I can harmonize it, and seeing how I can weave it in with the other themes
that I have put in to a piece of music. When I am playing with it, I come upon
something of a rough draft that I want to edit.

So when it comes to editing the rough draft, I have many ways that I can go
about it, and which direction I take will depend upon what I want out as the
finished result of my composition.

I might take something like a realist view point in this case. For instance, I
might incline myself to believe that there is something like the "archetypical
version" of the piece that I am playing, that this "archetype" in some way
exists, and that it's my responsibility as a composer to render my piece in a
way which most closely matches this archetype.

I might also take something of a more nominalist perspective to editting my
draft. Instead of presupposing that there is any sort of pre-existing notion of
the music I am composing, I can instead look at all the material I have
accumulated, catalog it, outline it, fill in some transitions, and create
something of a sound structural work.

Now, in both of these cases, I have taken a view point of the world, and that
view point has guided the processes and reasoning that I use to conduct myself
in the world. The concept of realism, I might find useful, and the concept of
nominalism, I might find useful.

In fact, I would argue that there are an infinite number of ways to go about
this process of how to reason about your rough draft. You could take a
"Christian" point of view, and pray to your God and ask him for guidance on how
to edit your draft. You could take a more Taoist stance, and say that you will
do your best to open your mind, and let the flow of life breathe it's essence
into your notes. Or you could take a more rationalist stance. You could
sequence out the harmonies of your draft, and simply polish up the rough edges
using music theory.

In fact, there would probably be some combination of all of these ideas that
would be the most ideal for creating the "best" piece of music. And I use the
term "best" in quotes here, because I want to be clear that I am not talking
about any sort of idea of an absolute sense of "best" here, but instead I am
just saying that different perspectives of the world will produce different
kinds of music, music which can be compared and contrasted.

What this example illustates is the idea that your world view should be
dictated by the results that spring out of them. Of course, there is more that
goes in to a world view than just it's utility, and I don't want to go down this
rabbit hole at this point, but I just want to make the point here that every
world view is at least partially judged (in my mind) by it's utility in the
world.

The point is, when it comes to something like Realism and Nominalism, we will
never come to know what exactly is the mechanism for things existing as they
do (or at the very least, it doesn't seem to me that such a thing is knowable,
but that again could be an entire discussion on its own). It might be the case
that in some ways, Plato is correct about "forms" leading to "shapes" which
coorespond to a correct and useful way of viewing the world. It also might be
more correct in some cases to talk in the inverse way, and only give names to
things as we observe them and recognize the patterns in our observations. And
as long as we're at it, let's throw in all of the other ways that the
mechainsms of the universe might work. We might all be souls, floating around
in a nether realm, or we might all be in a virtual reality simulator like the
matrix.

All of these different things are ways of perceiving the world. And because the
universe is so unknowable, the exact mechanism by which we exist in the
universe is also elusive. But what we do know is that we are getting pretty
good at constraining the universe to certain bounds and talking within
those bounds. We have made a great many advancements to our understanding of
the workings of the universe by bounding ourselnves in this way. And because we
have gotten so good at it, we are approaching the point where we say that this
way of thinking about things is "more real" than any other way, and that's
true on some level, but we must also remember that the scientific way of
thinking, though very vast and very useful, cannot encapsulate everything that
we understand about the universe and our place in it. At least, not yet, I
don't know what the future holds, but at our present understanding of the human
condition, to make any claims about what exactly the universe is and how it
functions with any sort of absolute certainty would most certainly indicate the
markings of a mad man.

Also, one more thing that I feel I must say.

> "Problematic doesn't mean something doesn't exist. We just don't know how to
> explain it to our satisfaction."

This line of thinking is, well, rather empty, I would say, and I only extract
out this point because it's something that grinds my gears. It's like saying,
"The best thing about my theory is that you can't conclusively prove that it's
false." Okay, sure, being able to prove that a theory is false would make it
worse than if we couldn't (obviously), but it also happens to be the case that
no theory, no matter how rigourous or long lasting it has been, can ever be
conclusively proven true. In other words, it's a feature of every theory that
it's truth will only ever be partial, and there will always be problems with it
that must be overcome.

Every theory is problematic, but for those that are especially problematic, we
should attempt to directly approach what about the theory is problematic, and
focus on that. It's always in that process that we are led to the most useful
and insightful understandings of the things that we don't understand. Instead
of shrugging the problems under the rug and continuing to reason about
something which we have willingly acknowledge has problems, we should instead
work to rectify those problems so that we can come to a more complete and full
understanding about the world around us.

So I only partially agree with the last paragraph, that we as human beings
should treat the world with mysticism. I would say that sometimes we should
treat the world with mysticism, and we should most certainly allow ourselves to
develop those aspects of our personality which are concerned with coming to
understand the "divine nature" of the universe. But we should also remember
that the mystical viewpoint is only a certain point of view, with it's own
assumptions and it's own utility, and that other points of view can also lead
to insightful and significant leaps in our understanding of the universe in
ways which would not be possible otherwise.

No one knows what the universe is, so it seems wise to keep an open mind to all
theories, and continually test and refine our understanding of what theories of
the world will be the most adequate and congruent for us as we make our way
through our lives.

## Final note
I might have missed the original point of Charles' thoughts. I think he was
just making the point that Nominalism is something that was born out of
Realism, which I agree with. But regardless, I think I have hit on my opinion
of the topic rather well, and I'm curious what you think.
