# Stream of Consciousness
So right now it is a Tuesday in April, nine days in to the month, and I am to
the point now where I have a few things that I need to get done.

The first thing to mention is that I am at work right now, and I am doing this
stream of consciousness typing from my desk there. If someone comes up, I might
have to alt-tab in to something else.

Something else to mention is that I am listening, at this very second, to a new
mix on youtube that I have not heard before. It's called something like, "Piano
music for study or sleep." Which to me seems like something of an okymoron, but
I'll go with it, and see what it has in store. So far, the first piece of the
playlist was reasonable enough, just your typical pop piano work. For the time
being, I'll leave it on, because it gives something like sufficient white noise
for me to work and write like this.

Another thing on my mind is that I am nearing the completion of my first full
draft of the acceptable version of the Seth and Cain story. It's gotten to the
point now where I really just want to sit down and write out everything else
that needs to be done, but I know that in order to get it to a point where I
would consider it publishable (ha! as if) it would take a lot more work as far
as editting and polishing the words is concerned.

That work wouldn't be too difficult, but just time-consuming and tedious.

The thing is, I'm almost to that point, and I really want to start working on
those aspects of this work, but I still have yet to write the end of part five,
the end of part six, or the epilogue, so I think it would be safe to say that
it's not quite ready to be put in to that phase yet. Still though, I want it to
be there, and I am to the point that no matter how un-inspired I may feel about
writing original dialogue to complete the piece, I am about ready to just bring
myself to that point so that I can have the complete alpha version of the work
complete and ready to edit.

Besides the Seth and Cain story, I have, of course, other work that needs to
get done. Firstly, the build for April is coming along nicely, and it's due to
be completed by the end of the week. So that gives me something like 32 hours
to work on the build. I am currently working on a four hour case, and I'm
hoping to, at some point, knock out a few cases in one day. For right now,
though, I think it would just be awesome if I could get this four hour case
behind me, so that I can move on to other things (like maybe writing the ending
to my Seth and Cain story)

I also want to mention something about how I slept last night. So I did not
have dreams last night, but I certainly had feelings in my sleep. I spent a
good six to seven hours asleep after the SC2 match I had on youtube concluded.
When I woke up around two or three o'clock, I moved to the chair, and attempted
to sleep sitting up in that. This worked for about an hour or so, when I
tumbled out of the chair and decided to resume sleeping on the floor. When I
made this decision, it was still dark outside, and I decided to move back in to
the bedroom.

I slept again like this for another three hours. During this three hours, I
thought about every potential sleeping position. By the time I woke up around
7:15, I was facing North-West IRL, and every five minutes or so I would adjust
my sleeping position to turn myself some number of degrees clockwise. I then
began to reason that it made no sense waking up until I had gotten through all
of the positions of rotational symetry I could get together. So I spent another
forty five or so minutes rotating in a circle as I continued to daze in and out
of waking consciousness.

I had the watch with me, so I was well aware of the fact that the time was
slipping past eight am. I didn't care. Laying down there felt too good.

At around eight, though, I reasoned that I was about sixty percent through the
full rotation, and I would just have to live with the fact that I was missing
that forty percent out of my life.

It was funny, because as I was driving to work this morning (so something like
fifty minutes ago from the time I am writing this) I was thinking to myself, "I
think that's about the perfect representation of everything that is misaligned
in my life right now. I have an idea, but I'm not able to complete it, and then
I'm forced to move along a different path in life." In some sense, this event
(not really a dream but illogical like a dream) expressed perfectly the
disconnect between my transcendent reality and the reality that I live in.
There is about sixty percent of my life that is in line with my psychological
drives, and about forty percent of my life that must be accomodated for.

So I think that about touches on all of the things that are on my mind in this
moment. I could go on about something else, but I don't really have the brain
power to do that right now. Or, I could say more aptly, I am still upset that I
had to disrupt my sleeping cycle in order to make my way in to work.

Oh, I need to call my lawyer as well. I just needed to throw that in there.

I also just want to mention that the piano mix I was playing earlier was all
right, but it was just a single piece of music played over and over for eighty
minutes or however long. So I got exhausted of that for the time, and turned it
off. I am now listening to an EDM mix.

I need to work on my actual work now. The biggest thing for this four hour case
that I am working on is actually getting data that does what I want it to. But
once I get that, it should be okay.
