So last night I had two dreams. The first dream took place at the camp. What I
remember was my mom, and Kevin Rose's wife (of all people) having a convesation
about something emotional, while I was on the top floor. I walked down a floor,
and they said high to me. Then I went down another floor, to the base level,
and there I started drinking some water and talking with Kyle and Evan there.

As I'm doing that, I say to myself, "Oh, right, we are about to leave, so I
should avoid drinking that much water." So I stop drinking water.

At around that time, my dad comes by, and says, "Are you drinking water? You
know we are about to leave right."

I say, "Yeah, but I'm about to go pee and then we can leave."

At this point, we get into a sort of heated back and forth kind of shouting
match, with him talking about how stupid I am for drinking water before we are
about to leave, and me telling him that I'm about to go pee, so he doesn't have
to worry about it.

Eventually, after we are finished shouting at eachother, I go to a tree off to
the side, and I pee there, then I come back to the top of the bluff, and we
prepare to embark.

The "car" there is really more like an airship. It's got a large belly, where
the "passengers" will house themselves, and then the upper deck, where the
steering columns and everything else are.

As we get into the car, my mom has to help my dad up to the steering area,
because of the Luekemia, and at this point I feel slight remorse at getting
upset at him, but it's not really remorse, the feeling is more like remorse
combined with the feeling like, "Just because he has cancer means I can't hate
him? That's bullshit."

In fact, after he gets set up in the steering column, my mom comes down with us
into the belly with us, and we embark. My mom asks me about it, and I say just
that, "What, so just because he has cancer means that I can't hate him?"

The answer to that question isn't really resolved, and we continue on. I end up
going outside, and looking. We are sort of dipping up and down through a sort
of river/creek thing, inbetween the forests, and we are getting dangerously
close to touching the water. There also was something of a tail, which was
carrying part of our cargo, and it was also dangerously close to getting wet.

That was that dream.

The second dream was not as interesting. It takes place in a version of work,
where our work office resides in a room in the mall. In this room, Leslie
decides that everyone should flip their desks for a time, so Luis and I have to
go to the other side of the room.

We do this for a day, and during that day, there is a dev case that someone
picked up, and I look, and I see that they have a team of people working on it,
and it's being done super innefficiently, but their on the right track, so I
don't say anything and go back to my desk.

Then the next day, I expect that we are going to move our desks back, but then
we don't so we spend the whole next day at the wrong desk. I'm a little vexed
about this, but I don't really care.

There was also something at the end where I talked with some of the people at
the restaurant.
