# 20190308
So today is a friday. What I want to do is set a timer for twenty minutes, and
then when that twenty minutes is up, I will see how much I have typed in that
time.

I will just remember that 8:28 is the time to remember for this thing.

Occasionally I will put down marks as the current time, because I think that
writing out the time like that is probably a good practice to get into
regardless. If writing down the time can become as common place as writing down
the words that I am writing down right now, then the whole notion of putting
time stamps throughout a journal becomes pretty much nil. In fact, it becomes
totally nil, because then it just counts as another word in the journal.

8:09

So with that out of the way, lets move on to something else here. It's
something that has to do with the fact that I am at work right now, and I find
it more important to do things like this instead of actually working.

How this usually goes is that I will have some sort of idea of something that I
want to do, and when I get that idea going in my head, I will then continue to
write out and explain what that idea is without any need to have any sort of
anything going on anywhere.

Basically, what I'm saying is, it's the morning, and I have work to do, but
instead of doing that, I am doing this. Which is fine, getting fingers warmed
up is a good thing, but yeah, the point is that this isn't exactly work.

8:11

I guess I'm not sure what it is that I want to tlak about. I think at this
point it would be best just to observe my minds eye and allow it to fill me
with things to talk about.

For instance, something from my minds eye that has been intruding on me now at
this waking moment in time is the method in which I masterbated yesterday. I
decided to try masterbating in the tub with some vaseline. When I got in the
shower this morning, a full twelve hours later, the tub was slippery, and I
still felt vaseline on my scrotum.

Of course, I scrubbed myself off as best I could, and left it at that. It's
just something I'm going to have to be aware of for a bit of time.

Because of that, I think it's easy to attach the method in which I masterbated
with shame. But I don't think of it that way. You see, this was my attempt at
trying something different with myself. So instead of sitting in front of a
screen and watching porn, I thought that maybe in a dark bathroom with a hot
tub I would find the motivation to masterbate.

Well, I ended up forcing an orgasm out of myself, and I'm not even sure that
anything came out. As soon as that happened, I blasted the cold water on to
everything, and tried to clean out the best I could. Still though, it was a
whole thing. I got out, I dried off.

8:15

So yeah, I'm not so much ashamed of the experience, but more so ashamed at the
fact that I have to deal with the consequences of that experiment for some time
now.

And it's not a long time mind you. It's been only twelve hours and I feel okay. 

Pause for two minutes

8:16

8:18

So back to where I was.

I slept okay last night. I ended up falling asleep after playing a couple of
games of starcraft, and then 

9:05

So we're back again. I just knocked out an error that was happening to Soniya
related to my case. The error had to do with the sql data type "sql_variant"
exhibiting strange behavior when put through our sql builder. It's an
unfortunate consequence of the nature of the "sql_variant" data type that it
matters whether or not the input of the insert statement contains quotes or
not. Because of that, when the record was being inserted into the target
database, it was getting written as a string because our sql building decides
to put single quotes around things that it's not sure about.

So yeah, now that I understand that, it was just a matter of changing the
structure to not include the records that were causing the data descrepency.
The thing does not have a default now because of taht, but I can live with
this.
