So last night I had two kinds of dreams. The first wasn't really a dream, so
much as it was a night hallucination.

So I have begun to eat PBJ again, but when I did, I proceed to get heartburn in
the night. My dream was essentially of an orb, and this orb represented my
heartburn. My imaginiation was attempting to use this orb to keep me
entertained in my sleep, so it started bouncing up and down to one of Bach's
inventions, I'm pretty sure the G major one, although it could have been the F
major one (and the more I think about it, the more I think it is the F major
one.) That was the extent of the dream.

The second dream takes place at the airport. The dream begins, and I am finding
a parking spot at the airport, because I am there to pick up a friend. So I
park my car, and then I go inside to the terminal check-in, and I talk with the
TSA agent there, to check-in, and find my friend, and everything else.

Well, as we are talking there, she asks me about my info and everything, and I
give it to her, and when she pulls it up, she finds my criminal record of
possession of marijuana, and proceeds to whisper back and forth with someone
else there.

After they talk for a bit, she proceeds to address me, and says, "So, I'm sorry
this is coming up, and I'm sure you're annoyed with this, but it seems as
though you have a record of possession of marijuana. We would like to search
your car, if you don't mind."

At this, I thought back to my car, and of course I didn't have any marijuana in
it, but I did have the shake on the drive shaft, but that is not enough to
warrent arrest for possession. Still, I didn't want them to search it, so I
replyed back and said, "Yeah, I actually do mind if you search the car, I don't
have any marijuana, but I don't want you to search the car. I believe I have a
right to privacy."

And that was that, and they said, "Yes, you do have that right." After that,
they said that still, they had to usher me back into a back room to take a
urinalysis.

I follow them, and I am led through a back room. In this room, there are
multiple people on computers in the room, all work diligently. It's probably
something like forty people in a room about twenty feet by ten feet, all in
aisles, each working on a computer in front of them, which were all facing a
window which showed some airplanes on the tarmac.

We continued on through this room into another. This was about all I remember
of the dream, but I believe in this room I was handed a cup to take a UA, and I
said, "you know, this is really silly since I literally just took a UA the
other day."

That was the extent of the dream.
