So I just  finished reading the first part of the two part novella that is
Notes from the Underground by Doestoyevsky, and here is the commentary I have
on it so far.

The first part read a lot like a Russian version of Neitzche. It was composed
of eleven different epitaphs, and each epitaph read very similar to something
the German would write. The difference being that German must be a more compact
language than Russian, because where Neitzsche will write for maybe a few
hundred words per epitaph, putting thirty inside of twenty pages, our Russian
friend had more to say for each one, and had eleven of these inside of thirty
or so pages.

The second part, from what I could tell, looked to be a retelling of some story
by our friend, the narrator of the "notes", from the underground. It seems to
introduce multiple characters which were significant to our narrator at one
point or another in his life, and it is probably the case that he will go
through some sort of psychogoligcal transformation during the whole story,
which is the entire reason he feels compelled to write it out in the first
place.

So, this seems to be the layout of the work as a whole. The entire thing to me,
I would say, is something like a catharsis of Doestoyevsky, and to treat it as
anything beyond that would be a little bit pre-emptive I think. Someone like
Peterson would say that to take someone like this lightly would be a grave
error in judgement, but at the same time I would argue that to place men like
Doestoyevsky or Tolstoy or Neitzsche or any of these other great men (and I do
concede that they are great men) on a plane of existance that is somehow
"higher" or "above" our own would be foolhardy.

So, with all of that being said, it could be an interesting exercise to work
through the catharsis of our Russian author friend, and see at what points he
makes his poitns, and what it is the points that he wants to make.

So far, he has made the point that, living in "the underground" as our narrator
puts it, he has lost touch with his connection to the "greater good" of the
world, and instead you become only concerned with the day to day doings of your
own personal life.

When this happens, as much as you would like to pursue "higher interest" like
fine arts or apprenticeship, you simply don't have the time, energy, or skill
required to acheive sufficient mastery at such things to become considered
even just proficient at these tasks, so you resign yourself to your day to day
tasks, and allow yourself enough time to amuse yourself idly with other lives
that you could have pursued but couldn't due to the circumstances of whatever
tragedy placed you squarely in the underground.

So, I imagine our second part of the story will be some sort of hypothetical
tragedy that could happen to a man in the underground which would serve to show
that in the underground it is very difficult to climb out, and instead it is
much simpler to give in to the simplicity of menial labor and consistent wages,
even if that means selling off more and more of your artistic soul to be fed in
to the machine of running the civilazation which puts food on your plate. And I
imagine the 'moral' of the story, not that there really is one for a story like
this, would be that as long as society exists, there will always be an
'underground' because if there were not, then there would be no creativity to
stir the hearts and imaginations of everyone in existance.

Or something like that. Fuck if I know.

So yeah, I don't really think there is much more I can say about it beyond
that. I haven't read the second part yet, and will plan to do so soon, but in
the mean time, I think I will plan to do something else, if that's going
outside for a short jog, or fuck if I know what else.


