So two things I want to say straight up before I go.

Last night I had a really intense dream. I have spoken it into my phone, but I
do not have the energy right now to speak it into my fingers, so I am just
going to let it sit for now.

The second thing is that I want to talk a little bit in a condecending way
towards a certain kind of person.

So I am of the opinion that, when it comes to conversations about the nature of
the universe, being more specificially either ontological conversations, or
epistmological conversations, or more in terms that don't use large words taht
I don't fully understand, when it comes to asking questions about who we are
and why or how we exist, I believe that a foremost requirement to any such
discussion is an understanding that it is quite literally impossible to ever
truly know the nature of those aspects of reality apart from our own
experiences.

This is something that I have been getting around, and I have not been able to
adequetely express for some time now, and it is still the case, I can feel,
that I am not able to adequetely express, but it's something that I believe is
of the utmost importance.

Discussions about the form that reality can take can only be taken by those
that understand that it is impossible to know what that form is.

I think this follows rather straightforwardly from the first principles of
meta-discussion that I have tried to lay forth in my works. But regardless, I
would like to draw the argument here.

So the first part of the argument asks the reader to imagine him or her self as
simply coming into existance at this moment in time. I would like the reader to
imagine that they are able to take a snapshot of their "essence" or their
"being" at some moment in time.

Now, the next exercise is to then ask the reader what this snapshot might look
like. There would be a few things in this snapshot, and indeed, it would
probably be an interesting experiment in psychology to see how an individual
would describe their existance in any given moment. But the point here isn't to
talk about what the person perceives about their snapshot in retrospect.
Instead, we would like to talk about what it is a person is actually
experienceing in that moment. So, for instance, there might be some sensations
of a chair on the persons butt, if they are sitting, and there could be
something like a picture of the persons vision if their eyes are open. Maybe
the room they are sitting in is a little frigid, so feelings of cold are also a
part of this snapshot. And, for arguments sake, we could say that this person
is thinking about something she said to her friend earlier in that day, and she
is in the process of thinking through it and trying to understand what she
meant by what she said. In other words, she is invoking a memory of the past,
and it so happens that the invocation of that memory is a part of this
snapshot.

All of these things would be the picture of that person's being in that moment.
Now, imagine that we had a device which was able to place you into exactly that
same state as you were in that moment. We could configure you, and your
environment, and everything about the way the neuron's are firing, so that,
without any sense of being jarred or frightened or startled, we could place you
in exactly that snapshot of what you were feeling in that moment.

So the point of this whole thing is to think about this. What things do you
"know" in that moment? You feel that there is cold air on your skin, so someone
could be inclined to say, "I know that the room is cold." However, it's also
possible that, in that moment, someone has installed your clothes with a cold
infused layer of some nano fiber which gives you the sensation of coldness just
the same as cold air might. When presented with this idea, the first objection
is, "Well that's just silly, no such technology exists, and it's entirely
unreasonable to think that the cold that the person in this snapshot is feeling
is the result of some crazy nano-fiber cold layer of clothing." But the point
is not the plausibility of such a scenario. Instead, what I am trying to
illustrate is that there is a difference between the "snapshot" of the persons
essence, and the interpretation of what that snapshot may be.

To illustrate this point in a different way, suppose this person is just now
coming on with a case of tinnitus in the ears. Tinnitus is simply a perception
of "ringing" in the ears. In fact, suppose just before there has been a loud
noise, and this snapshot is taken just after the loud noise has subsided. So
the ringing in the ears is most certainly part of the snapshot. What do we
"know" about this snapshot?

Well, we would say something like, "There was just a loud noise, and after that
loud noise, that caused the perception of a loud ringing in my ears." So then
the question is, "Do we know that the loud ringing doesn't exist?"

So the person says. "Well, since this is a thought experiment, lets run a
little experiment. We will say that, in this situation, the person has been
recording all of the noises that have been occuring in the room. For the sake
of the experiment, the person has a perfect sound recorder, and will be able to
perfectly replicate, down to the slightest vibration of every air atom, the
noises that occured in that room. And not only are they able to perfectly
replicate it, but they are also able to lower the amplitude of the noises in
the room."

So first, the person will play back the loud noise as it happened. When they
play it back, they hear the ringing in their ears, as was expected. But then, a
second time, they play it back again, but this time they lower the intensity by
a significant number of decibels. This time, they hear the noise, dampened, as
they did the first time, but there is no ringing in the ears. Therefore, they
conclude, that the ringing in the ears was a result of a false perception in
the ears, rather than an actual ringing noise in the background.

But then the question then returns to the person in the snapshot. We would like
to ask whether or not there is ringing in this snapshot I have created. I
illustrate this like so to clarify exactly what this snapshot is. The point is,
in the snapshot there very much is a ringing in the ears. That is a part of the
person's essence, it's a part of their being, so therefore, it belongs in the
snapshot.

A reasonable objection at this point is to ask what sort of machine would be
able to capture a snapshot in this way? And the answer to that question is,
there isn't one. This is the binding problem of Neuroscience. What is it that
binds ones consciousness to physical reality? We don't know. So we won't dwell
on how such a machine is made, because the machine is not neccesary to
understanding the point of what I am attempting to illustrate here. Instead,
it's useful as a way of thinking about what is meant when I say one's "essence"
or one's "being." I mean the thing that this "snapshot machine" would take, if
such a snapshot machine could exist.

So now, I would like again to talk about the case of the person sitting in the
chair, feeling sensations of cold air on their arms. So now, again, we would
like to ask, "What things do you know?" and you would say, "The room is cold".

When asked then, "How do you know that," most people would say, "Because my
skin feels cold."

So the question then becomes, "Is it neccisarily the case that, when your skin
feels cold, the room must actually be cold?"

We could come up with whatever reasonable cases for why there might be a
mismatch in this person perception of the temperature of the room and the
actual temperature of the room that we want, such as the nano-fiber clothing,
or perhaps some oncoming skin disease that the person is unaware of as yet, or
whatever else, but for the purpose of argument, let's say that none of those
things is happening. We do the neccesary test, similar to person experiencing
ringing in their ears, and we deduce that those things are not happening.

So the question still remains, is it neccisarily the case that when your skin
feels cold, it means the room is cold?

On some level, we could talk about the "inverted specturm" thought experiment,
where ask whether or not the perception of cold is the same for all people who
experience cold. But that, again, is not the purpose of why I am illustrating
this point.

What I am getting at is this. When the person experiences cold, or light, or
anything, the mind would like to represent it to ourselves (the observer, so to
speak, of our experiences) as something meaningful. If our mind's didn't have a
way of doing this, our entire lives would be a whole chaos of emotions and
feelings that we never "make sense" out of, and our being would have no
direction or purpose. Such a state of being would be less than ideal for
survival. So in order to increase or odds of survival, we have evolved to be
able to "make sense" of the experiences that happen to use. When we perceive
something, like the sensation of cold, it gets processed in the brain and gets
compared with all of our previous experiences and memories. With the training
of all of those memories, we have constructed something of a model of what we
think reality is. We have noticed a pattern in all of these experiences, and
through this pattern, our brain has been able to draw conclusions about how
these experiences correlate to eachother. This pattern is also borrowed from
others, others being our parents, our school teachers, our mentors, our peers,
the things we read, and so on, and we are able to see the pattern not only in
ourselves, but we are also reinforced in our pattern of thinking by the
communication that we are able to experience from others. We have been able to
see these patterns in our experience, and since these patterns occur so
frequently, we have created something of a model of reality with which we can
use to help our brain explain and reason about the experiences we have.

When we first start to develop this model of reality, it is imperfect, and
while it might explain on some level the reasons for the patterns of experience
that we have, it is usually the case that something about the model is
incomplete, and that through experiment, we can see the holes in what we see.
However, as we become more developed, our models that explain the patterns that
we experience become more sophisticated and more refined, and we are able to
more accuarately apply, and react, to the things that happen to us.

In fact, eventually our models become so refined, that we cease to think about
them as "a way of explaining the patterns of our experience" and instead begin
to think of them as "the source of all experience."

In the first view, we simply have experiences, and we create models which
explain the patterns that come, and in the other view, we see model as
something like the "source" of experience. This is what allows us to say
something like, "The room is cold" when we feel the sensation of cold; we have
become so well trained and well versed in our sensations that we no longer need
to place any intermediate steps between the perception of something and our
recognition of that thing as reality. Instead, we just have an experience, and
given that the experience is able to fit within the patterns we have previously
constructed, we see that experience not as something of our consciousness, but
instead we say that the experience is "actually real".


