So last night I tried something new in order to see how it worked. After I
returned home from work at around six o clock, I decided that I would
systematically bring myself to sleep. So about as soon as I walked in to the
door, I got undress, turned off most of the lights, and began doing the wim hof
method while seated cross legged on my box. I did that for three rounds, which
took about eighteen minutes. Then, I counted to 110 breathes in 11 minutes. Do
the math on that one. (Spoilers, its 10 breaths per minute, one breathe every
six seconds.)

After that I took another hit out of the bong, and proceeded to fill myself
with a nutbutter and jam sandwich, and two bowls of cereal. I also took 75 mg
of dipenhidetomorphine (or whatever it's called, the active ingredient in
bynedryl) and I watched some videos on youtube.

I must say, I had a strange sleeping experience. First, I rememeber being
conscious for most of the starcraft II game that I was listening to, but I was
certainly going in and out of sleep the whole time watching it. In my
estimation, I completely lost waking thought at around 9:00 pm.

At around what I presume is something like 3:00 am, I wake up, and I observe my
surroundings. I determine that it is dark, and that I should go back to sleep.

This event happens probably a half dozen times before I entirely wake up. I
woke up in my sleep, determined that it was still night time, and went back to
sleep.

In between one of these two waking moments, I had an anxiety dream. My mom had
warned me about some sort of roaring beast thing that had killed her. She told
me that she was walking through the woods, as you do, when she was attacked and
killed by a wild beast that came out from behind the trees and jumped on her.

In the dream, I spent a moment mourning her loss, which I think mostly entailed
holding her lifeless body in my hands for some moment in time in the dream.

At some point after this, I was in my apartment (in the dream, that is) and I
was visited by the ghost of my mother. She warns me that the beast that killed
her, it's still alive, and it's going to come for me. She starts to talk in a
wild and circuitous manner, but mostly the ghost of my mother becomes overly
concerned that the beast is going to reveal itself and pounce on me at any
moment.

I, of course, was not so keen of the threat that the ghost of my mother was
warning me about, as I was inside of my apartment, and as far as I was aware,
no beasts had crossed the threshold of the walls of my apartment. Regardless,
she continued to plead with me, and told me she would leave me alone if only I
looked for the beast within my apartment.

Still annoyed by the ghost of my mother, but also eager to hop on the
opportunity to appease her so that she might leave me be, I agreed to look for
the beast. But I told her that I wasn't sure where to look.

It was then that the ghost of my mother led me to the desk which is sitting in
my living room. When she led me here, the desk became very large, maybe 8 feet
total in height (when, irl, this desk is perhaps 3 feet in height) and likewise
with a larger total width and depth. It was enlarged in the dream.

Still though, even though it was enlarged, it was still easy to open and close
all of the drawers as I saw fit. Because it was a dream, when I was openening
the second drawer, I was able to stand on the same level as that drawer, and
open it as if I were spinning the "Price is Right" wheel. That was about the
size of this whole thing.

Well, my mom took me here, and told me that the beast might be hiding in one of
these drawers. I told her that certainly there were no beasts in these drawers.

At about the time I said that, a keen roar was heard from nearby. It was
difficult to tell exactly where this roar came from, but the roar of the beast
that my mother was talking about could be heard.

When this roar was heard, she said, "There, you see, the beast is nearby. You
must find the beast and take care of it before it reveals itself to you and
pounces."

Again, I was not nearly as concerned about my mothers threats as she was. I
reasoned that, even if this beast did pounce on me, I would still be able to
keep my wits about me and fight against it. Of course, I have no illusions
about the danger of such a beast, and I am certainly aware that it did kill my
mother, but I feel that, in the low probability that it does find me and attack
me, there is an even lower probability that it would pose in sort of life
changing or life ending threat to me.

But still, I was annoyed by the ghosts persistence that I check everywhere in
my apartment for the beast, and now that the ghost has heard a roar from
somewhere in the distance, she is even more insistant that I hurry up and check
all of my things for the beast.

So the first place that the ghost instructs me to look is the top drawer of the
desk. I tell her that we will look there last, because that drawer is the
drawer I keep my marijuana in, and I knew that if I showed that drawer to the
ghost of my mother first, she would fixate on that while she would still be
concerned about the beast. I wanted to quell her concerns of her mountain lion
before I brought up something like revealing my stash of marijuana to her.

So instead, I insisted that we start with the second drawer. I open the second
drawer, and I start rumaging through the things in there. Inside, I find some
random trinkets and papers, but after navigating my hand inside there and
checking all of the corners of the shelf, I determine that there is no beast
inside this drawer.

We both hear a roar again, and the ghost says, "Oh my, I hear it, you must find
it soon, check the next drawer"

So I check the bottom drawer, and inside there are some file folders and some
crumpled up air. When I look in to it, I say, "See, nothing here either." But
the ghost says, "No, check again, there might be something under that pile of
papers."

I look at the pile of papers that the ghost is talking about, and I see that
there could be something very small lurking under the pile. Maybe if we were
looking for a mouse, it could be hiding there, but we were looking for a
mountain lion, so I knew that the beast wasn't under there.

Still, though, to appease the ghost, I pushed down the papers so that there was
absolutely no air inbetween them, and I said, "See, nothing but papers" before
I closed the drawer.

Around this point, my mother was about to instruct me to open up the first
drawer, but before she could, the beast she was worried about jumped at us both
from behind the desk, paws with fangs foward, and came down on us from above.
I began to gather myself and fight the beast when I woke up.

This time when I woke up, I saw that it was light outside. I checked the time,
and determined that it 7:50, which meant that if I got to it, I could wake up
and get to work by 8:20. However, I decided that I would take an extra twenty
minutes in my day and meditate on my dream. This is the best picture of what I
dreamt last night that I can present. I had many other dreams, but those dreams
had more to do with feelings and sensations than they do with visual images.

Something interesting that I think is, when I woke up, after I finished
meditating on the dream, I decided to open up the drawers of my desk, and
determine what was in them.

So I opened up the bottom drawer of my desk, which I knew had file cabinets in
it, and in the back of it, I saw a mess of papers. I organized the papers, and
thought, "How interesting that my dream self would know to check here."

Then I openned up the second drawer, and saw a bunch of random trinkets from
childhood. I even found a old pair of opticles that I haven't worn in over ten
years.

Then, in the top drawer, of course, was my stash of marijuana.

But then, I recognized from where I sat, that the place where the beast pounced
on us was from the direction of the kitchen. In the dream, it was just from the
other side of the desk, but I noticed that on the other side of the desk from
where I was sitting was the kitchen, and in the kitchen, I have all of my
papers and tax forms and mail and so on for both my car payments and for my
lawyer fees. All of the neccessary paperwork, receipts, warranties, notices,
and so forth, were all piled on the counter of my kitchen.

It was at this moment that I recognized the meaning of the dream.

So right now I have a few things still pending that need to get taken care of.
I need to mail in the modification to my taxes, I need to buy a toll tag
sticker and pay my credit to NTTA, and I need to follow up with insurance and
my apartment complex to re-organize things in my life.

All of these things together make up the beast. The fact that this beast killed
my mother I think is the indicator of what will be the cause of her dementia. I
think the best way to interpret this dream is that this beast will consume my
mother until her death.

So then the fact that the ghost of my mother is then the one that is speak to
me, that I think represents the ghost of my mother speaking to me in the
present moment. My mother has been consumed by this beast, and as such, she is
something else. She is the ghost of my mother.

Also, the fact that the beast in the dream pounced on my from the kitchen over
the desk, as I was opeening the bottom drawer has a very easy interpretation.
The beast, while it is still docile, must be tamed, and organized into the
bottom drawer of my desk. That drawer is where I keep all of my important
files, and so, when they go in that drawer, they are filed away and handled.

It was interesting, because in real life after I had the dream, and I was
inspecting the drawers to see what was in them, and I was comparing what was
actually in the drawers with what I saw in the dream, I told myself, "There are
no demons here." As I examined the bottom drawer, and then the second drawer, I
said, "No demons here." Then, before I even oppened the top drawer, I said,
"Well, there are certainly demons in here" and I saw my stash in that drawer.
Then at this point I drew the correlation between the papers on the kitchen
counter and the desk, and also the beast in the dream, and also the fact that
my mother was greatly concerned about the contents of the drawers in my desk.

It all fits, psychologically, so I think the alchemical equation is complete.
