So last night I had a few dreams, and I remember some of them, but not all of
them, and particularly not all of the details.

So the first dream, I decide to go to church with Grant. We are there, and as
we are there, we are in the congregation, and everyone is all huddled together
singing something. I'm in between GRant, who is on the end, and someone else,
and I end up pulling Grant in to me. Afterward, Grant mentions that he didn't
expect me to pull him in so close.

When the service is over, I end up talking with someone else there. I forget
exactly what the thing was, but she had some sort of baby, but it wasn't a
standard baby, it was like some sort of lizard thing that she was treating like
a baby. I honestly don't remember much about it at all. We end up having a
conversation about it in the rafters where the organ is.

So the second dream is the most prominent of last night. It is basically a sort
of horror movie. So the premise is, our house is set on the bay (or ocean, or
some large body of water) and from my parents back yard, there is the water,
with a pier, and the pier extends out sideways across the shoreline for quite a
ways. All along this shoreline with our pier, our dad has captured some fish,
and he has genitcially mutated them based upon color to react to different ways
to electrical impulses, and by doing so, he will create patterns and such for
spectecle and awe.

So at the beginning of the dream, I remember going under the water, and I
actually watched from the bottom, as teh yellow fish, and the blue fish, and
other fish all arranged themselves quickly in different patterns to create
rather cool fish patterns.

I think it was from this first trip underwater, though, that something started
to go wrong, and the fish suddenly decided to get hyper aggressive, and began
to attack me. I started swimming off, and I started to get really heavy, and I
just barely got to the edge of the water where I was able to get out.

After I got out, I started to explain to my mom, and dad, what had happened,
but my dad didn't believe me. Kyle was there as well, and he wanted to check it
out from the shore, so he tethered himself to a rope, and started walking out.

My dad wanted to check it out, but I warned him that he shouldn't just jump in
and see, so I started to try and post a board on to the side of the pier that
would be used as the base of a tether.

Eventually, I forget exactly what happened, but my dad ended up just jumping in
to the water. When he went in, the fish started attacking him, and latching
themselves on to him, and he was able to swim out. WHen he got out, I was able
to scrape the fish off of him on our back porch. He then called Kyle over, and
said that the fish were becoming violent. I was a little annoyed at this point,
because that was exactly what I had said, but I was glad that we were taking
action now.

So at this point, I remember my dad coming up with a plan. He said that what he
was going to do was jump in the water, and let the fish attack him, and then
get out, and we can scrape them all off onto the land. I said that I didn't
like this plan too much, but I didn't have a better idea, and I wasn't actively
opposed to this plan, so I agreed to help in it.

Also, it's worth mentioning at this point that in the dream I am convinced that
this is the premise for a movie, and that this dream is all just a sort of
reenactment of that movie. I tried to think about how the movie ended, but I
didn't know, because I hadn't seen the movie all the way through, so I decided
that when I would wake up, I would watch the movie. This wasn't a lucid dream,
but it was sort of nearly so.

So my dad jump in again, and the fish begin to attack him. My dad is swimming
around the area where the fish are, but as he gets to a point, the fish begin
to overwhelm him, and he can't get out. I see that I need to help him, but I'm
apprehensive about getting bitten again by all of these fish. However, I looked
out, and a lot of the fish that would have bitten me were biting my dad, so I
decided to get in, and if I did get bitten, it would be minimal.

I get to my dad, and I try and boost him up on to the edge to help him out, but
he says, "No, you first, then I can get out." I tell him "No stupid, I came in
to the water to help you." In this confusion, he brings me under multiple
times, because I am trying to help him up, but he doesn't want to get out of
the water until I get out. Eventually, he gives in, and I boost him up out of
the water, and then I get out of the water. At this point, I scold him, and I
ask him, "What's the rule?" and he says "Always accept help when it's given"
and I said, "Okay, good, so we're on the same page now."

So now we are at a point where the fish are starting to mutate. They have
gotten stronger with the passes we have done to try and get them out of the
water. They are beginning to jump out of the water in attempts to attack us
while we are on land. Some of them have taken the form of Crocodile Jaws (just
the jaws and not the body), and they are quite large and strong.

So at this point, we are at a loss of what to do. I remember saying something
like, "They are mutating, and they will continue to get stronger as long as
they are in the water."

At this point, someone, I forget who, but he could be best described as a "good
ole boy," goes to the wall of our parents house, and he peels off a sort of
"ant killer" tab, which was covering up an ant hole, and out of it comes a
bunch of ants. I remember thinking, "Why the fuck would he do that?" He then
says, "It's time we did this to them," refering to the tab.

Someone else there, who could be best reffered to as a good ole girl, then
says, "It's time you hit them with the tide bleach. That will kill them for
sure." I remember saying, "Oh, no no no, that's a really bad idea, it will only
make them mutate faster. But I remember that no matter how much I told them
that it felt like a bad idea, they were convinced that it was the only way to
stop them from mutating further. It was around this point that I woke up.

The last dream took place with my grandparents. They decided that they wanted
to play a game. They were to give me a phrase or something similar, and then I
would have a dream about something, and then after the game I would recall my
dreams, and they would compare them to the phrase, and see how well it matched.

I agreed to this, and proceeded to have something like seven dream fragments. I
don't remember them now, but in the dream I did.

So after I had all of these fragments, I started to explain them, and we had a
humorous time comparing all of the fragments to the words that they were
supposed to match with. My grandparents thought the whole thing was humorous.

--

So I was just listening to some JP, and I don't usually listen to his Q and A
things, but for whatever reason I decided to listen to this one, and one of the
first questions that he talked about was from a guy who asked how he should
deal with the resentment he has with his parents (well, not exactly, that's my
question, but what he asked was basically the same thing, mostly) and Peterson
said something which I found interesting, and that was to write out in great
deatail in exactly what way you are resentful, and then for each of those
points, figure out what you can do about it, and how you can work through it,
and start with the small ones, and work up, and that way, you can get it all on
paper, in a concrete way.

So I want to try something like that, because in the past, I must say that I
have felt quite a lot of resentment towards my parents, and it's been like that
for at least the past five years if not more, actually getting pretty close to
something like eight years, or more, and it's getting pretty ridiculous. So I
want to create something like a free form writing session where I just detail
out in what ways exactly I am resentful towards my parents, and from there, see
if I can work anything out to help myself try and attempt to let go of that
resentment.

I just want to say, before I go on this, that my problems at this point are my
own. I think, what the solution is to this is that I need to find some sort of
mentor, or someone to look up to, that I can point to and say, "That man is
awesome," and my parents never gave that to me, particularly my dad. So I think
the most abstract and unactionable action item is to "find a father figure."
And it would be perfect if a father figure were to just appear in my lap today,
and I could have someone to look up to, but that's not going to happen. So
instead, here we are.

I also want to say that I really don't have much of anything to complain about.
That is, my life is actually pretty good on paper. The thing is, I'm missing
something vital that makes it feel way worse than it is, and it sort of
paralyzes me in this weird state where I don't know what to make of my
condition right now. So a lot of the issue is that I just need to "man up", and
I know I can man up, but the thing is that I don't know in what direction to
"man up" and I don't want to just "man up" in a way that is unproductive or
even counterproductive, so instead I stay where I am out of fear of making
things worse for myself.

So with all of that preamble out of the way, let's begin.

So the most obvious way that I am resentful towards my parents is in the
absolutly disgusting way that they, among others who are guilty of similar
crimes, have indoctrinated me into a weird sort of cult that wishes to deny the
very facts of existance to perpetuate a narrative which is so clearly
mythological in a way which would lead you to believe that if you don't take it
as realistic fact, then you will burn in the mythological place that they
created. I could, and have, go on and on about Christianity, but suffice it to
say, I think the greatest harm it does is in convincing people that the stories
and myths exist on some level of thinking that they very clearly don't belong,
and by attempting to tell a story where those myths are placed on that level,
they conflate all relationship to reality, and create a system of practice
which is so far removed from what the world is actually like, especially as we
know it today, that it will certainly produce much harm in those that are
unfortunate enough to be born in this world.

So that is teh most obvious example of a way in which I am resentful towards my
parents. Or I suppose that is a way in which I am resentful towards
Christianty, and I am resentful towards my parents because they have become
possessed by such a way of thinking.

That is one of the largest points on this topic towards my resentment towards
my parents, and towards my resentment of the world in general. So perhaps,
having placed that there, we should move on to some smaller things, because,
well those smaller things will be much easier to tackle, and will probably lead
to actual gains because of that.

So another way I know I am resentful towards my parents is that they sought,
and still seek, to micromanage every aspect of my existance from the moment I
was born. Especially as a child, growing up, being homeschooled as I was, I was
not presented with anything which produced the neccessary challenge towards
what life is and should be like. I was presented with textbooks which required
me to simply learn how to read, and based upon that, I was given exams which,
when completed, would indicate to me that I must be extremely smart. Given this
false sense of intelligence, coupled with the fact that my mom managed every
aspect of my day to day living, from my school work, to my financial
situations, to every interaction with the government or the public, to even my
interactions with my friends at the time, that when it comes to attempting to
organize myself or my schedule in any way, I am unable to do so without the
pressures of my parents, and as a result, I have a very unstructured time table
and way of living.

Parallel to this has to do with my dad. Any time I needed help with something,
or aimed to try and help him or asked him for help with anything, he would
simply do the thing, rather than attempt to help me with the thing. He has
actually mentioned this, and said that it was due to overcompensation of his
childhood being the exact reverse, where no one ever helped him with his
troubles, and he was always left to do it by himself. Still, I harbor that
resentment towards my father in that way.

Another way I am resentful towards my parents is that their expectations of
what my life was to be like were so staggeringly mediocre, and any deviation
from that mediocrity would result in pushback from them, where instead of being
encouraged to take risks, I was actively discouraged because it went against
the standard idea of "having a family" or "getting a education and job". Some
concrete examples of this include active discouragment from doing Crossfit (I
remember my grandmother actually telling me one day "not to get too fit,
because body builders are gross"), from Ultimate, and currently from BJJ. This
also manifests itself in my coaches and other people through my childhood, who
all had the mindset that the children should enjoy the activites more than they
were concerned about actually becoming proficient at them. This includes Coach
Schram from gymnastics and Mr. Stinson for piano. I once remember, when I was
20 and first started smoking weed, that I told my mom that I was practicing
the piano again, and I had gained new perspective on it, and I told her that I
was using practice techniques which were working so much better than when I was
practicing with Mr. Stinson, and I said, "Either I was a bad student, or Mr.
Stinson was a shitty teacher" and my mom said, "Oh, you were Mr. Stinson's
greatest pupil, you were his number one student" at which I couldn't help but
chuckle at the logical implication that she had just placed herself in.

I also am reminded of the "big conversation" that I had with them, where I told
them I wasn't Christian, and that I was smoking weed, and that I wanted them to
ween me off of their support. I actually told them that I wanted them to ween
me off of insurance and all of the other things. I also said that I wanted to
act as a personal trainer to them in exchange for some of the services they
were providing (they were paying all of my bills at the time for free, so I
wanted to at least work for some of them) and they declined that offer, and
simply continued to supply me for free.

That honestly blows my mind when I think about it. It's so mind boggling to
think that, as a 20 year old, I wanted them to ween me off of their support,
and not only did they not do that, but they also stiffarmed my advances to come
up with an actionable plan to do that.

I'm not sure what else there is that I am resentful of, in regards to my
parents. I think the biggest thing so far is that they have sheltered me to an
extreme, to the point that when it comes to everyday things, especially when it
comes to social situations like dating, I feel rather worthless.

In fact, lets put that one in there to. I was given a rather unhealthy view of
sex and what it's role should be in our society. I was told that it was one of
the most evil things to do, except in the context of marraige, and that the
best way to avoid sex related problems like out of marraige children and std's
is to just simply not have sex, and that is that. And on top of it, any
romantic interest that I would even think about pursuing was always shut down.
It felt forbidden to even have friends that were girls until I was out of the
house, let alone any sort of romantic relationship, and all of our friends and
social gatherings, which were organized by my mom and other moms, were always
segregated by gender, and interactions between genders was discouraged.

I guess, something related to the "fuck Christianity" point, but something I
feel resentful for even beyond that point, is that any discussion where I would
bring up something which was considered "blasphemous" or "taboo" was always
either swept under the rug, or dismissed as something that I'm not allowed to
say. I'm obviously reminded of the .9 recurring equals 1 discussion, but also I
am reminded of discussion like the rainbow after Noah's arc, and the "god is a
programmer" discussion. All of these things were legitimate discussions that
needed to be had, but instead, I was treated as if "something was wrong with
me, and they needed to figure out what it was and correct it."

That about does it for now, I'm about 3k words in to this entry, so I should
probably just leave it for now. I'm sure there is more, but I don't feel like
writing any more.

Honestly, I don't know how much this helps, I had already reflected on these
things, and I genereally already knew them. This is just something of a
compliation of other things taht I have already said in other journal entries.
That, and I still don't know what to do with it.

I suppose I know the answer, and the answer is "I am missing a father figure"
but I guess the next step will be figuring out how to obtain one. I honestly
think that is where my efforts should be focused. But such a thing is hard to
obtain. So I don't know.

Regardless, I'm done for now.
