So right now I am to the point where I want to head back to my apt and grab
some things. Let's do that right now actually.

So I am back from my apartment and I am working again. In fact, I have been
supposedly working for the past four hours or so, but in reality I haven't done
any work at all. I have meditated, and I have contemplated the pain of
existance, but in the end I have not accomplished much in the way of actually
getting any work done.

So with that being said, mostly what I am intending to do is to write myself a
little bit of text to speed by the process of waiting for the end of the day.
It's a whole thing that I don't really want to do, but it's still there none
the less.

You see, I feel strange just leaving work at four thirty, even though I am not
doing any work, because there seems to be a rather strong stigma against
leaving work early.

All of that being said, I really don't want to talk about anything. As in,
there is not really anything that I want to talk about.

Actually, I think there is one thing that I want to talk about, and that is how
good it feels to lie down flat on the ground. I mean, holy shit that feels
good.

I did not think I was that tired (I have been awake all day, and I have not
fallen asleep or anything at my desk) but apparently so.

Something I will say is that, a couple of nights ago, over the weekend, I was
binging some sc2, and before I realized it, I was drinking coffee and playing
games until seven in the morning. WHen I started to see the sun come up through
the window, I finially decided that it was time to pack it all up and lie down.

Even when I got to that point, where I told myself to lie down, as soon as I
lied down, I started to get the impulse to get back up and play the game again.
I did not, and immediately went to sleep some seconds later.

I then woke up seven hours after that between three and four in the afternoon
on sunday. Of course, my first thuoghts when I woke up were how difficult the
Monday morning was going to be if I wasn't able to get to sleep that night.

Fortunately (after I had played some more games, and was getting definatively
frustrated with sc2) I was able to head to sleep that night, and get another 9
hours or so of sleep from nine to seven or so.

So, when you look at what happened there, I basically just adjusted one
sleeping session towards the next morning, and in that twenty four hours, I
slept for about seventeen of it.

I don't know why I just detailed all of tihs out. I was hoping that I would
write it all out, and then when I got to about this point where I have many
lines of text all in a row, at this point I would have thought that I could
look back at the time and look in wonder as the time is time to get off of
work. But there are still ten minutes to go, and I think it would be wise to
adhere to at least a couple of those minutes.

I will make some tea instead. Let's do that. That takes time, and won't drive
me insane.

At the same time, though, I don't feel like I really want tea, it won't taste
good to me right now (I don't think I really feel like it) and in general, I
think it's important to understand that I am just talking here for the sake of
talking.

In fact, no matter what I do right now, it seems to be that it will be done
with the intent of getting these next nine minutes to go by as quickly as
humanly possible. Well, that is something that I don't want to do, but it is at
the same time the thing that I am doing, so I suppose there is no fighting it.

I guess, this is a good thing. It's a lot like writing practice (which I have
done a lot of typeracer today, and lately, and I think it shows), in that I
just write and write, and I have no end to the writing. But it's not like
writing practice in that I can't get into the "zone" of writing. That is, I'm
not to the point where I am lost in the writing. I am still acutely aware of
the fact that I am at work and killing time, and I am not focused entirely on
the words I am writing. Mostly because I know these words will never be read
back, and that they don't matter in that way.

It's something that I think requires me to be on my toes.

I have watched the Coddling of the American Mind discussion/debate/interview
with Jonathan Haidt and other co-authors of the work, and I find it to be quite
interesting the way he talks about the social media crisis and what it's doing
to young children, especially girls. The levels of increased anxiety and
depression in girls, not only in the psychologically report avenues, but also
in the more pragmatic ways of looking at it (hospital admissions, suicide
attempts, and so forth), is quite frankly astonishing to me, and fascinating at
the same time. It makes my soul cry out for those that are too in pain by the
ridiculous socialogical constructs which led the predicament which we now face
ourselves.

I found that interseting.

I still have not captured up the remainder of my time here. I am about ready to
simply get up and walk away, but I think that would be in poor taste. After
all, I am making great pains to go through some writing exercise, and I don't
wnat it to go to waste. I want to get the full time out of it, and I don't want
to lose any seconds to some perceived earliness in my time here.

Fuck it, I'm done, I'm out of here. Existance is pain, I just want to die!
