So right now I just want to take some time out of my day and write out both my
anxieties, and also anything else that I feel like spiraling in to from there.

After all, what is the purpose of harboring anxiety in to one furnace if you
can't reap the benefits of the heat of that furnace before you get to the point
where you have to put it out?

So this is what I am attempting to do. If it works, I will consider myself a
genius. If it does not work, I will also consider my sef a genius, just an
unfortunate one. Either way, I'm a genius.

So let's begin.

Over the past couple of months, I have been harboring most of my anxiety
towards one decision that has to be made. That decision is the one to move out
of my current apartment, find a new one, and move in to that one.

So right now, it has been at least sixty days since I have been consciously
aware that this is something that I have to get done, and so far it has been at
least that amount of time that I haven't done anything towards actually looking
at new apartments, or setting a move out date for my current one.

I remember, the moment this became an anxiety, rather than a simple
procrastination, is when I realized the date to notify my apartemnt complex
thta I was moving out was already past expired if I wanted to not pay any
amount of money on a month-to-month rate. When I realized this, I said to
myself, "I have already past the due date, I see no rush, until I reach the
next dat, to make any sort of action on this front."

Well, tomorrow is that date. That is why I am writing this right now.

I went back to my apartment complex today, and I went in to my apartment. It
turns out, (if we back up a couple of hours) that earlier that morning I forgot
my work keycard in my apartment, so I figured that was the best excuse to go
back over there and recover it.

I left at eleven o clock when I did that. I walked in, and after probably
fourty five seconds of searching, I found the keycard on the ground, wedged
between my shoe and the wall. Why or how it found itself in that postion, I
honestly do not know.

But our concern here is not so much the key card. I could probably analyze
myself mindfully if i wanted and figure out how that keycard probably ended up
there, but I don't really care about that. Two things that are more important
are first, how did it get seperated from my wallet outside of the work
environment and second, the freudian circumstance behind missing the keycard at
work compounding all of my anxieties in to a large conglamoration of nonsense
led to me feeling an acute but very profound sense of relief that my keycard
was indeed in the place where I suspected it was (somewhere in my living room,
which it was) and I was very glad that I was not so unfortunate as to have to
chase my footsteps all through my mind to find the god damn thing.

So with that out of the way, when I found myself in my apartment, having found
the keycard, I reasoned to myself that I have two options, when it comes to
what my next steps are going to be.

The first option is to be a responsible adult, walk my way over to the front
desk of my complex, inform them that I intend to move out soon, and that I need
to set a move out date, and so forth, and I could knock out that anxiety on top
of my current one (the missing keycard) to give myself a profound jolt of
dopamine.

But instead, I did what I would consider to be the more reasonable thing, and I
filled my system with cannabis, and proceed to align myself as best I could.

I am currently working on a certain pose in yoga. The pose has something of a
similar look to dancer pose, but the difference being that you are in something
of a kneeling position instead of a standing one. What this means is that it is
significantly harder to achieve the flexibility required to acheive the full
expression of the kneeling version, but the progression towards this expression
requires relatively little balance when compared to the traditional dancer
pose.

Of course, both dancer poses should be practiced at the same time to facilitate
a sense of same ness but also difference in the practice. I will admit, in my
session just momemnts ago, I did not practice any variation of the standing
dancer pose, but instead, I spent time exploring what sort of progression might
be the most effective for the kneeling dancer pose, and I forwent much excess
complementary practice, in favor of just becoming familiar with what the full
expression of the pose might feel like if I had the flexibility for it.

I am going to want to transition my talk from yoga to something else soon. I am
right now in the middle of writing my hour for the day, and so I would like to
continue on with something else.

What I might do is edit some of my Seth and Cain work, and see if I can't get a
suitable ending to my final section before the epilouge.

So I will now transition over there.
