So right now I am rather tired. I woke up at around 5 o'clock and proceeded to
lie down for another twenty or so minutes before actually getting up and
getting in the shower and making my way to the gym to train for the early
morning six am class. After the class, I went to the showers at work, showered,
and worked my way up to my desk. At my desk now, I have spent a good hour or so
browsing Reddit.

Currently, and I think I mentioned this yesterday as well, I have to put
together the Alliant Online portion of the Blue Chip report for work. I do not
have to work on the report itself, fortunately, because that report seems like
a hot mess of a case, but as far as making sure that the report is available
for Alliant Online, I need to do all of the things required to make a page for
the report. It's not that difficult, it's just brutally obnoxious for many
reasons. I could get in to them, but suffice it to say that if you are reading
this, you probably have some idea of the annoyances that are involved with
doing anything significant with web design in this way.

I could go on a rant about how much I dislike web design, but I don't really
feel like getting in to something like that right now. In fact, I don't really
feel like getting much into anything right now. I am typing in such a way that
I feel I am consistent with my key press frequency. I am making sure to attempt
to type in a way that leads to consistente typing speed. I am typing probably
at something like sixty words per minute or so. I'm not sure if it's more or
less than that, but I feel as though this is a good pace to get into the flow
of typing things like a story, and getting teh story out into the page like
this.

Of course, the problem right now is that I don't have a story to write. But
what I do have is words in my head that I can keep saying. I can just keep
writing the things that come into my head, and as I write them, it makes more
things come in my head. Since I am tiyping in this way, with my eyes closed and
my fingers steady, I am able to continue my train of thought in a rather
cohiesize and coherent way, so that I can consistently work through saying the
things I want to say without stopping occasionally to "find inspiration" or
anything like that. It's all one big whole idea that I am imposing upon myself
for two reasons.

The two reason, because I will forget that I said the two reason thing, are
that first I am tired, and I want to sleep, but at the tsame time, I want to at
least pretend that I am being productive. I can justify this typing by saying
that it's important for me to write out explicitly exactly how I am feeling,
and what my mind and my emotions are going through, and this is the best way I
have found to do that.

The other reoason is because I think it's interesting to get into the flow of
writing by just observing your train of thought. There will be times when I
have a train of though, but I will be so bent towards writing out a particualr
story that I simply don't do   that, and instead I just write out something
iuninspired or uninteresting. When that happens, I end up with a story or an
excerpt that you could say is uninspired, and not really worth reading or
looking in to further. It bcecomes something of a forced endeavor. It would be
like having sex without foreplay. Sure it might be enjoyable, but it would most
certainly be more magical if there were more foreplay involved.

So with all of that being said, I can honestly say that I don't know where my
train of thought is going to take me. It is mostly just sitting there at the
mement. I have had a few thoughts about my curerent state of tiredness, but I
feel as though I have already said all there is to say about that.

So what I have done now is placed some rain white noise in the background. I
could say the sorts of things that get conjured up by the sound of the white
noise, but that seesms again like it could be unitneresting. Mostly, I am
trying to focus on the things that are in my head, but it's hard to do because
I am having to focus on my typing and on the words that I am saying into the
keyboard. However, I will say rather deeply that having the rain noise and eyes
closed really leads me into ia sort of state of what some would call trance.
It's not like the words ot n the page ore just being typing by my fingers. It's
not like that at all. Instead, what I notice is that as I type more and more
like this, the more I am able to think about something, and focus on it, and
describe it, without ehaving to think about what is happening in my fingers. I
am very tired.

I know I have already said that, buti it's entirely true that I am very tired
right now. I just had a deream that Iwas spinning around with my child. I do
not know whether he is a son or whetehre she is a daughter,bubt either way, I
am spinning,a nd the child is in the bacdkground, spinning with em, andI am
looking into his/her eyes, and I am taking in what they gieve me.

It's also rather interesting to od this, becauethaere wa s reason to do it. My
arms bocems ccccccccccccc brain had arms.

I am goetting reallynubmd.Nub to the point of notwwhatnt
ttrrrrrrrrrrrp........... cccccccccccccccp....................cccccccccccccc

So obviously, as you might guess by the seemengly random array of letters
above, I did indeed fall asleep while I was writing. In fact, I might even do
it again. You see, when writing out a train of thought, it tends to be the case
that something will come out, but in some cases, such as the one above, I just
kept writing until my brain said that it was done, ant which point the
activators for sleep kicked in. 

So here I am, writing again for the second time today about absolutely nothing
with the hopes of getting to a point where I can safel fall aslpeep and have my
dreams and let them just be my dreams in peace.

So if the lpan is to have dreams, I want to get to  apoint where am starting to
feel numb, as if my body is secreting some osort of hormone which allows my
brain to sleep and my bedy to go numb, and when that happens, sleep will occur.
But more than sleep, something more might occur. I maght actually have
sometihng taht I want to write about ater I wake fromm my sleep. That is
entirely possible. f course, it might not go like that, and I still
obviouslyhave a ways to go when it cames to the art of sleeping iwhth your head
up and your eyes closed, but I think it'ws worth a try.
I am so tired, and actually also cold right now.  I only mention the cold part
is because I ah salso tired, and want o be able to sequence thes twothngs.

So there, stopped typing and I got lost in a world where I was thinking about
bjj class. I was thinking about how yesterday, when I went to class in the
evening, and everyone put their gi on, I was literally the only one with a
black gi on, and every onele had a white gi on. When I was thinking about this,
Ia also wthought about ekxactly in hat way I tired. I can escape from work like
this, with my eyes closed, working on nothing but typing words into a keyboard,
and with it I can bring myself into little blurbs of microsleep, with dreams.

So the thing is, I want to be able to write as much as I can. It's rough fgor
you if you are only able to type say thirty words pert minute.

Like for instance, now, I imagine the archetype in myself that is fat, and
lazy. He is being coddled by a lday that is convincing him to stay fat, and he
is indulging himself in being fat. It's quite a thing actually. I am quite
amazed by that image. It just happened as I was typing the paragraph before.

And becasue I am tpyping I don't even remember what the paragraph was. Just the
image by itself came up. This is for sure the bst way to get to the bottom of
the archetypes that I want to explore.

So with that, I must say that it isdifficult to find the word s to type all the
time when I am doing this. It is a tricky thing to totally figure out. It's
actually sort of interesting, because, at the current pace that I am typing,
each individual letter feels like it's own independent thing,wherase you might
think that I have something like senstences in my head, instead of that, what
we ware working with is a memory of sentences back behind my brain, and from
ther things start to appear.

Again something appeared. The image of me getting into acr and speeding off. It
was ntot a car on the road ,ronor was it on a track. In fact, the car was as
best as a car can be, an isolated incident as far as mental images are
concerned. I had the image of getting into this cra, and listening teo the
sound of it driving offf. I don't know where this image came from, but that is
what it is.

Now, something also interesting tolk about, becaues I feel as though I have
mostly touched on the thing that thappened to me inthe immediate present, is
that I just lost my train of thought. It's gone. I was writing a sentence, and
now it's gone. It's probably cogone forever, but I'm aokay with that. I could
open my eyes and rea.

So it's interesting, because I did open my eyes right nhthere ,and I di soee
something that concerned me. There was a matter of work that I had to attend
to. So I attended to it, got up to use the restroom, and then from there
proceeded to sit down and get back to writing like this. When I did that, I did
read back the very last sentence I had written before I got up, and it
mentioned opening my eyes to check back on something. So it's interesting, I
think that I was writing about opening my eyes, and when I did, I opened them,
and I saw something that needed my attention.

Of course, such a thing isa coincidence, but it's interesting becasue in the
world of dream I don't think there is a such a thing as coincidence. Well, I
think that things coincide, but the fact that they coincide always has an
underlying cause. But in this case, and in many cases, they concide at a much
deeply level than it may first appear that they do.

I kind of want to elaborate on this point, but I really don't want to right
tnow, I don't feel like working throug h old school christan nonsens in my
brain, and instead I want to set a new precendent of thinking from this point
forth. Or rather, not from this point forward, that makes it sound like an
ultimataum, but instead I just want to begin to set the preciedent that I want
to have intelleigent coneversations with myself, rather than simply
conversations about past pathologies with reliogion.

So that being said, I don't know what more to talk about right now. Perhaps
that's ironic in some way. By setting myself free I have fated myself to
unspeakable levels of boredom and lack of ability oto speak on subjects. But I
think it's rather crucially important to realize that what I am doing is
working on myself. I want to work on myself and in working on myself, I will
find more and more things that need to be worked on.

Something that is bothering me is the lack of responnse that I have gotten from
my friend Shravic and my friend Alex. Bot of them I have messaged, and both of
them I am expecting teo hear forom, and neither of them have responded to me.
It's a whole thing, and I am anxiously checking my phone every hours or so at
minimum to see if I have gotten anything from them. It's one of these things
where I have a problem, and I want this problem to be solved, and getting a
text from either one of these people would solve the problem. However, I have
done evyrthing I can in my power to make this problem as best I can solved, so
all I can do is make sure not to miss them wihn they text. It's a weird thing,
where I check my hpone, and when I don't have any new mesages, I get excited
and then deflated all in one motion of the hand. It's so strange that a single
devidece that fits in the palm of my hand has the ablity to do that.

Of course, my observation about hpones is not orginal. I am sure there are many
others that talk about the phone and it's effects on us as human beings. But
the thing is, I think it's the case that because the thechnology is so new
still, every human being is still coming to this idea each in their own way,
and I must say that it's a whole thing that I have to be able to contend with
and work on.

I am in a point where I am not sure what I am typing or for what reason I am
typing any more. I am typing now for the sake of typing, and Idon't really knew
to what end I am reaching with my words. I like typing in this way, where I
have asteady cadence with my fingers for the word s I am typing. This way, Ican
have asteady tsteram of consciousness, and when I have that, I can let the
world s just sort of trickle out of my mind and into the concept of the things
that the words come out of my mind to represent. I am getting an image of a
water hose spraying out at an arc. I am seeing the dog jump up to eat and bite
at the words of the water hose. It is something weirld, because I knew the
words of the water hose doesn't make sense as a phrose in itself, but within
the context it works, and when I have the steady stream coming out it just came
out like that, and I decided to just go with it and let it be. So there are
some points here I want to take a breake and not say anthing any more and let
the words be done, but I am not letting miself have that break, and I am
continueing to write regardless of thatttt. I't is very tired my eyes right. I
am tried, but I am also a tager. Something interesting. I use the word
interesting a lot in these contexts, perhaps I sohuld work on that, and not use
that word so often. Maybe I should use a different word. But I think that
doesnt' get to the root of the problem. Because I f a said peculiar istead of
interesting, or if I said quaint, or tall, orr bulbous instead of interesting,
all I have done is substitute one word in for another, and all that will do is
buput in a word in the place where there used to be a word, and that word will
be a different word then the werd s that was there in the first place. That
doesnt' really gain me anything.

Now, I just got the image of a giant fish swmimming by and eating up all of my
train of thought. It did so with a massive noise as well. It made a groaning
noise at it slowly swam by my train of thought and began to eat it. I am
reminded of the moment inthe phantom menace where they are traveling in the
underwater city of naboo and a big finish comems by and attempts to eat them,
and they servive becasue there is alway a bigger fish. That fish was that
bigger fish.

I don't think I can emphasize enough just how tired I am right now. I am
closing my eyes and letting the words come out of me, but with every oword that
I type it becomes more and more difficult to sustain this level of writing. I
want to be able to hold back some.
