8:32

So I have read now the first two chapters of Elantris. The prologue introduced
Elantris, then the first proper chapter introduced Prince Raoden, and his
transformation into a Shaod, and the second chapter introdcued his now
"widowed" fionce (I forget her name, something like Celeste, it's actually
Sarene). The third chapter introduces some more characters, and I'm not sure
exactly what those characters are supposed to fit in the whole story. I will
re-read that section at some point. But right now is not reading practice,
right now is writing practice.

So let's see, what is there that I want to write about.

Firstly, the reason I can justify my writing right now is becasue I am waiting
for the structure update to finish on some data that I am waiting for. I know,
if I wait long enough, the structure update will surely finish, but for the
time being, I am simply waiting here, waiting for the thing to do whatever it
needs to do.

Right as I type that, the structure update starts moving again. It looked, for
a moment, as if it were frozen, but now it is going through fields and such
again, and it is doing so at a decent pace, so I presume that it is working
properly again.

I need to do some testing today. It is still in the morning, so if I could get
at least one case done before I do anything. It shouldn't take me a long time
to do these things, it's just a matter of opening up word, and then following
all of the steps that need to be taken in order to get there. So let's chill
out for a moment.

Now that the structure update is finished, we can go and check what's going on
with the program. I'm going to dive in. I will return when I feel it is
appropiate.

8:39

2:16

So I wish to return now to free writing. I wish to do so in a way that allows
me to lose myself to the whims of my doings. I sort of want to put on some
music to go with it. However, as I will be going to work out soon with Chris, I
want to make it look like I'm working as much as possible.

So I want to make a point to write and not look at the words that I am writing.
When I do this , I know my accuracy goes down a little bit, but it is also the
case that I am able to better reach in to my mind and grab out the words from
my psychoe as they come. I am able to write them out in a creal and coherent
way, and it's quite amazing to me that such a thing is even possible, even
though I have done it many many times.

So I only have about ten minutes at this point to write something more, and I'm
not sure what I want to write. It could have something to do with my fantasy
world, it could have something to do with the fantasy world of Sanderson and
Elantris, and it could have something to do with something else entirely. I
quite frankly do not know.

So with all of that being said, I want to read some more Elantris. I might read
the next chapter after we are done working out. I can confindently say that I
am able to continue writing, because I have made reading a primary task for me
in my time after I work out. It will be great.

I have also gotten to the point where I have honed in my system of annotating
the text that I read, so that I can get a much better sort of idea of what is
going on in each chapter, and what he main structure of the work is going to
be. I like reading Sanderson, because not only does he have a way with
providing graphic details to things that I think would otherwise be mundane
details, but also because I think that the way he plots and structures his
writing is very well done, well paced, and gives his work a nice narrative flow
to it.

So let's go over this system for a bit then, just for the sake of having
something to write about.

So firstly, every chapter should be seperated out in to it's own file. What
constitutes one chapter will vary from work to work, but in general, I would
say if you start to get to the point where a chapter is a thousand lines of
text or longer, then you might want to re-evaluate what a chapter means.

Regardless, at the top of every file, I have something of a header. Now, when I
parse out some text, my lit analyszer will automatically put some text there.
But I also want to put some text in for myself. THis is where I put italicized
lines, where I mark out the proper names and places that I am unfamiliar with
as I read the chapter. If, at any point in the chapter, as I am reading, I run
across a proper name that I don't recognize, I will mark my place, do a quick
analysis on what that proper name means, whether or not we've seen it before,
and what's it's role in this chapter is, and I will mark my findings at the top
of the chapter.

So, once I have this information compiled out, I will then be able to start
marking off sections of the chapter.

Some novels (such as Sanderson) are arranged such that there are consistent
marked breaks in the middle of chapters. These breaks are good indicators of
where the section breaks should go.

Some novels do not have such convientieent break points. Depending on the
length and scope of each chapter, it might make sense to break at more or less
points.

Regardless, once all of the section breaks are set, I like to then go through
and read each section, and give something of a run down of what went on. The
high point of what happened, and if any new characters have been introduced,
introduce them.

I also like to create something of a tiered outline for the whole thing. In
fact, I think it would be safe to say that having a whole outline view of an
entire novel would be a great thing for editting and managing the creation of a
novel. One day.

I'm about to go ride on a bike for some time. I might continue this when I
return, or I might decide to actually do some actual work. We will see.
