So last night I had a couple of dreams. They were mostly fragments. In fact,
they were almost entirely fragments now that I think about it.

So the first dream was about Neural Networks. Yesterday, towards the evening, I
hopped on Discord, and talked with Kyle and Evan about various AI things, and
the topic of Neural Networks came up, and we all mentioned that we have seen
the topic is passing, but never really decided to dive into it.

Well, I started to dive into it last night. I looked up what a Neural Network
is, and I started watching some videos and reading resources to educate myself
on how they worked.

So the dream was essentially this. There was a girl, and she had teeth, and she
wanted to place all of her teeth into certain recepticles. She was using Neural
Network to decide which recepticles to place them in. It turns out that in this
particular problem, the answer was entirely black and white, but the network
had a problem where, when she had five teeth to put into recepticles, the
network would tell her to put three of the teeth into a particlar recepticle,
and then it would leave off the other to. As I started looking in to it, I
decided to put some code into the network that if the rest of the answer were
so obvious that the network was simply leaving it off, then it should duplicate
the answer for the remaining teeth. Once I did this, the network was complete
with it's Black and White answer.

The second dream was very short. Essentially, I woke up and checked my email,
and I got a few emails from Iona, the penpal that I wrote to yesterday. The
email in the subject said, "Great message with promise of more to come." And
then, in the body she said, "So actually, my name is Vicka, not Iona, that's an
alias I use on the internet." It then continued to say, "Wow, that's one hell
of a first email, I feel like this is the start of a really valuble
relationship." She then said that I should follow her on some social media
site (it was a social media site that I haven't heard of because it doesn't
exist irl). I then got another email from her that was like, "omg, the email
didn't send something." I forget what the something was, but it was some sort
of picture. I had four total emails in my inbox.

I woke up soon after having this part of the dream, and I immediately was like
"That was a dream, I don't have emails, and her name isn't Vicka, it's Iona."

--

So after open mat today I had a dream.

This dream starts in a restaurant. It was a rather fancy restaurant. I am with
three others, it's me, Collin, and an asain man reminding me of both Jay and
Seonjae.

We are seated down, and we are given water. Collin then says that he has to go
to the bathroom, so he goes with his daughter.

When he is in teh bathroom, the waiter comes out and asks if we are ready to
order. I tell him that Collin is in the bathroom, and that we would like to
wait, and he replies and says, "Oh, okay, well how about I bring some chicken
to bring into the center of the table, and then some steak to bring for the
edges."

I was perplexed by this strange arrangement of affairs, but I go along, not
knowing what sort of customs this restaurant has.

He comes back, and puts some fried chicken breast and mashed potatoes in the
center, and says that thet chicken is ready ,but the steaks still need
preparing. I say okay. The waiters leave, and we continue to sit there, not
wanting to begin without Collin.

The waiters come back, and they ask how everything is. I say, "I'm sure
it's great, but we would reather wait for Collin before we begin."

The waiters then hastily take up everything, profusely apologizing for their
terrible service, promising that they will come back and redo everything.

Now at this point, I was rather confused at this strange behavior by the
restaurant. It's also around this point that Collin comes back to an empty
table. I wanted to talk about how strange the service has been so far, but the
conversation doesn't go in that direction.

Next, a Korean man comes up, elderly, and asks the asian member of our party
what he would like. He then begins to make his order in Korean, but the elderly
Korean waiter replys that he doesn't know Korean, but that he will accomadate
the best he can.

Our asian friend makes a quip which humors me, which was something really
simple like, "Of course you don't speak Korean, that would just be good
service." He then proceeds to make his order for fried chicken and mashed
potatoes, before the Korean waiter walks off. (I did not find it strange that
he only took Seonjae's order, that seem normal).

At around this point, the waiter comes back, and profusely apologizes for the
service thus far. I'm a little annoyed, because so far all I have done is
attempt to explain our situation, but the restaurant continues to insist that
it has been giving us bad service.

Regardless, the waiter comes out now with another "Chicken Buffet" for the
center of the table, along with three strips of steak in aluminum foil to the
side of our plates. He then tells us to enjoy. The dream ends with me examining
the pieces of meat, and determining them to be good slabs.
