So I have not yet put anything in this place, mostly because I have not been
very inspired to write anything at the current moment in time. It's a whole
thing, I guess. I don't want to write, so I don't write, and when I don't
write, then nothing gets written down, and when nothing is written down, I
don't feel like want to write.

It's interetsing, because the way I wrote that makes it sound like the process
goes in circles, but it really doesn't. The false bit in there is the statement
that says "when nothing is written down, I don't feel ilke wanting to write."
THat's just not true. Right now, there are tons of things that I have written
down, and yet at this moment in time I don't feel like writing. I feel like
taking a nap. In fact, I might do that, sitting here in my chair at work right
now. I would sit up, and I would stay in my chair, and as I am sitting up like
this, I will simply close my eyes, and make note of whatever I see. As I start
to do that, I will describe it as best I can in my words, and we will see where
that sort of imagination leads to.

So to start, first,I I will sit here with my eyes clased. The interesting thing
about doing it this way is that the process of wrtiing out what I see makes the
thing that I see change to such a different form that it becomes something
else. It's a weirld process, when I think about it.

But weird though the process may be, I will just say the first interesting
thing that comes to my mind.

Pause for a bit, I see a dragon with a long neck roaring. It is tilting it's
neck into the air and shooting fire into the sky. It is not interested in
attacking me or anyone else. It is only concerned with strectching it's nlungs.

It's pretty amazing how amazing doing nothing is. I also want to say that it is
pretty amazing feeling how this keyboard bottoms out. It's quite satisfying
actually to bottom out   the keys of the keyboard in a slow and methodical way.
I just want to fixate for a moment about how fluidly my hands are moving from
one key to the nekt and Iam nto concerned about what sorts of mistakes I am
making and instead I am simply hletting my voice say one owrd after another.
When the voice is able to say these things, and when the voice is able to keep
track of the things that are sai,d it creates something of an open channel
between the voice and the fingers, such tahtI can foucsus on the  fingers, and
creating something of a state where my fingers are just falling into the keys
as they should, and my brain is writing out whatever it sees or hears my inner
voice say. It's interseting to stop the inner voice sometimes though. Like, for
that senctence, I stopped there for a moment, and I realized the thing I was
going to say next was simply exteraneous. It was something of a link that led
to more rambling, and with the rambling comes generally speaking not much
useful to say. Unless, of course, the rambling does lead to something
worthwhile to say, but that doesn't happen a lot.

So right now, I want to tyry and continue to write my Seth and Cain story, and
I want to explain it to someone as if I were a teacher in a class tceaching it
to my students. So one of them asks me, "Brett, what is the Seth and Cain
story?? Can you give usa a summary?" At which point, this would be th summary I
would give them.

So the story of Seth and Cain starts by making a nod to the Cain and Able
story. In fact the very first words of the story are about how the Seth and
Cain story is about the Cain and Able story. The story is a re-imagining of the
biblical tstory of creation. Because of that, the adam and eve story must be
reimagined as well, as well as the "Prophecy". The manner in which these things
are introduced is paramount to understanding the purpose of the story.

That being said, the Cain and Seth story, as all good stories should be, is
meant to be read in isolation. One does not need to know any background about
adam and eve, or about the bible, or anything else to understand the motivation
and drama behind the conversation that Seth and Cain have.

The way the story is written, we hear both the story of Adam and Eve, and the
story of Cain and Abel, both from the point of view of multiple different
characters involved. The story starts with the upbringing of Seth, and how his
upbringing was formed by the events of the Garden of Eden. I am still working
on a finished outline, but this part about Seth's upbringing will mostly
contain a couple of paragraphs about Seth's daily life, and what's expected of
him, and beyond that it will be mostly about the stories of the Garden of Eden
(as told by Eve) and of the story of Cain and Abel (as told by Adam).

This will come circle when Seth talks with Cain, and Seth gets both the story
of Cain and Abel, and the story of the Garden of Eden from Cain.

I like this approach to the story telling, because it does a few things.
Firstly, it allows for a certain amount of material to be set in stone. When
things are divided out like this, we say, "this text will be about these
things." Since I am able to do that, it allows me to fill in other parts of
text with the things that sort of just come to me.

The second thing is that it connects the work at multiple places. Of course,
the whole thing is connected beginning to end in the sense that each scene
leads in to the next, but what this sort of story telling does is connect the
story at other, non-sequential points. This creates more connectedness in story
telling.

Since this is something of a free writing session, I will let myself get off of
the rails a little bit. After all, the whole point of this session was to close
my eyes and attempt to go to sleep. The t hing is, though, I was inturrpupted
in the middle of the ssession with a question, and that's qkay, this is my job
after all, but I had to attend to the question, which means that this writing
session shas been inturrupdeted. I am not quite as prepared as I should be for
saying things in my minds eye, and writting them out in the words of my
fingers. It is not flowing quite as well as it was earlier, which is fine, but
it's just a matter of pbringing myself back in to that flow state and getting
the words as they appear in my head back on teo the page in a seamless and
productive manner.

Something I just relaized that I do is, when I think of a word in my minds eye
that is really difficult to say or spell, I will often times skip over that
word for the sake of keeping my words simpler. When I do this, I think it
beigins to create a bias towards certain ckinds of words, not neccisarily the
words that are easiest to say, but the words that I take a liking to the most.
In fat, I am sure thaere a re  aa bunch of words that I say, but I just don't
like, so when I say  those words, it is because I have taken myself out of my
flow state, and dictated that I would change tho word that was in my minds eye
bceause I don't like typing that word. When the tping precoss is a beig deal,
then this becomes a contuinual problem, but when I bring myself to the point
where I decide that I wll typing only thi thing s that go into my mind, and
tonothing else, then I get in to a stote where I can write whatever I want at
whatever speed I want iand it's not a bproblem at all.

So, like I have said in the past, the trick to this whole thing is to make sure
that you have tho wrords in your head before hand so that way, when you type,
you have some idea of what the words will come out like when you type them.
It's an interssting idea, and one that I haven't really experimented with much,
but it seeems like it shows promise as far as getting tto the point where I can
sit down for an hour and write out an horus worth of typing in that time
woithout stopping to think about thwhatever it is I want to say.

When things come out lik. this, there is always something of a margin of error
that I will bring in to the equation. THe frirst oround ef edits should be only
the things that come out at you aon a read thorugh. So commas that are spliced,
words that are drastically mispelled, and so on. From there, you can do
something of  a re-working of the material. At this point, you could take the
maiterial, and place it all in cards, and each card could represent something
on an outline that you could put on to a story board and rwork in to a future
draft.

This is my drafting process. Each draft I will insert things that I have either
already written, or plan to write in the future, into the draft.

I like wirting my drafts over and over from the beginning, without reference to
the original work or the original drafts. What this does is it forces your
brain to place the contents of the draft in to your creative and interpretive
memory, rather than rely on the contents of a previous memory dump to create
new material. Every time you write a draft, you are a different person than the
person you were before, which means that you will write somehow differently.
When this is done enough times, the work can start to converge on a certain
telling. This is both a good and a bad thing. It is a good thing because ,when
a story starts to converge on one level of telling, that means that you have
honed it in. This is bad, though, because convergance, especaially premature
convergance, means that there is the topic of the story is not very well worth
exploring. When this happens, the story is such taht it's a little too simple,
and any sort of change in the sentence structure or the otuline of the story
doesn't do much to impact the overall message of the story. But if the story is
not so simple, from draft to draft, you might feel as though you are converging
when you are writting another draft, but when you go back to read it, you will
find that it is indeed different than the original work in some way, and if the
story is worth telling, then that difference will be noticable to any reader of
the story, not as hyperbole, but instead as an artistic decision.

When you start to write drafts in this way, it becomes a lot easier to find
where the holes in the story are. You start to get a feeling for pacing and
tone. You start to feel as though certain bits need to be expanded on, and
other bits can be shortened, or even cut entirely.

When the story is written in this way, it becomes sharpened, like a sword going
through the fire many times, being honed and pointed with each successive
forging.

So that's enough of that talk.

That's an interesting thing to think about. When I was writing that yout, the
original outset of the whole endeavor was to write out only those words that I
saw in my minds aeye. Of course, if I were to do that outright, there would be
a lot of noise. The point isn't to write aout a bunch of noise (although that
give me an idea and such a thing might actually be constructive towards
understanding the self pshycholgically, but that its a different expercise for
another day) but instead, the point was to get something of a flow state out of
my mind. It's interestnig, though, I think, when I start to pull on a train of
thought. The train of thought is whta proceeds to possess me for the next
amount of time while I am writing out and understanding that train of thought.
It's interesting to think about.

I 'm courious what this indicates. When I meditate, I will become fixated on
only one thing, and such a fixation will be so fdifficult that I wall only be
ableto keep that focus for only a small amount of time before I am back ot
thinking oabout whatever it is that my mind tends to think about. But when I
reinforce this idea of focusing on a single thread, and I supplement that
practice with writing, it seems as though I am able to write and write on the
same topic for minutes on end, without stopping. I hameve made the claim that I
am nonly writing ords that appear in my train of vision, but I think there is
something deeper happening here. When I think deepliy about sometihng, my minds
eye, in some sense, becomes that thing. I am no longer seeing a screen in my
head that puts words in fromnt of my consciousness for my fingerrs to dictate
on to the kepyboard. That's not whate happens anymore. Instead, it's likeu my
fingers just become the words, and I become the train of thought, and the
entire trian gets upt into the figrnegrs for the time that they have together,
and when that happens, the words just flow out of miy mind a t a much fatster
rate, and I am able to write down them as they come out. But instead of the
words coming out on to a screen, they are more like coming out af a faucent.
It's like I turned them faucet on, and now the flow of water can come out.. But
this is a special faucet. When I turn a faucet, the water comes out, but there
is only a certain abmount of water. That is why it gets' "exhausting to " to
write about the same thing for such an extend d period of tiem. Because my
brain is like a network of extended faucets, and writing about the same for
thing for an amount of time that is longer than the amount of that thing that I
wish to talk about requires my brain to go and find water from outher sources
iand feed it into the pump which powers that particualr faucet. That is the
part which is exhausting.

I think, to remedy this, it would make sense to have many things that I want to
talk about. So when I talk about one thing for some time, I get going on that,
and about the time I run out of things to talk about there, I have something of
an option. If I am feeling so inclined, I could draw on material from other
sources, and feed it into the pump that fuels the faucet that I am feueling at
that moment, or I can decide that the water is getting low, and that I should
accept that and move on to something else.

So that is my brain.

I am done talking about that. Which is sort of funny when you think about it
that that moment was when I was done talking about that. I could takl about
sohmething else, but I don't know what to talk about.

I think, the best way to think about this would be to say that I drew the water
out of that train of thought for as long as I was able, and now I have shut
down that foutcet for the most part. Noow, the thing to do is wait for there to
be build up in another faucet, so that I can relived that pressure and begin a
new train of thought an another topic.

I also want to talk about how much I want oto go sto sleep right neow. So right
now, what I will do is I will spend some time thinking, and I wll think to the
point where I am able to come up with an image. I will interact with that image
for a bit, and when I get ot a point where I think the image is trying to
animate in some way, or when I get ot a point that is a clear logical
mis-transit, I will go from there andsee if I can't reach in to a place where I
might be able to see and describe it as I witness it.

I want to type at 20 worrds per minute. I think this is fun to type so slowly.
It's an interesting juxtoposition typing quickly without making mistakes and
new typing really slowly not making mistakes at all. I have this thing where I
don't feel as though I am really typing everything as I am thinking it. But th
e thing that I am making sure of is thath the cadence of my keystrokes is
staying constant throughout the whole thing. It is interesting to feel your
fingers slowly start toreturn to the home rowi n a slow but consistent manner.

I'm curious what sort pattern you could find int he errors. I know that there
are some errors wwhere it's hard to even say what it is that I am trying tosay.
And there are other errors where it is clear what I am trying to say, but it's
simlply a slip of the fingers, where one letter is in front of the other when
it shouldn't be. So what I would like to do is continue typing until I make
another perceivable mistake and se what my fingers look like at the time of the
mistake. 

It is quite interesting now that I am looking for a mistake,the mistake is not
coming. I know I mad at least two or three mistakes in the previous paragraph,
even though that paragraph was upposed to be a perfect paragraph, but it was
not. However, it seems as though this paragraph is going to be perfect.

Now I am going to try the thing where I wait for something to come into my
consciousness and describe it. Well, words, something, bear crosstiger tagtyler
tony tiggel tigger tight pointsound, sargon, soup. Somtihng els, light, pass,
pound, opolish. Puff. Point. Purgatory. 

This is not useful.

Do I want to write anymore? Do I want to continue to type words on this
keyboard and have letters come up on the screen as a result? I don't know. That
seems wrong. I want to do something else, but I don't know what. I am alone,
and falling in a darkness of an abyss, and I can't get out. All I can see is my
third eye above me, watching me as I fall. If I scream, the sound only get
absorbed into the abyss. It's unknown whether or not the sound dissappears or
flys away into infinity. If I open my eyes, the only way I know is if I look up
and see the eye that is looking at me. But that eye is getting smaller and
smaller as I fall deeper and deeper in to this trance.

I am entirely in a trance right now. I am watching words come up on the screen,
and I feel as though I have no control over them. I put myself into a trance. I
hear sounds. Like a vibration of echoes rummaging through my soul. I am able to
pluck the strings of the void and create something inside of me. It comes to
life, it animates. I am focused on it. I can create a beat. One, two, one, two.

That doesn't work. This is the problem with written word. When something is
meant to be shown or demonstrated, it cannot. It must be thought through, and
made real through animation or through acting. But it's not real. It only feels
real, because it is teh same thing that I feel when it's not there.

My mind is like a canvas, totally white, and on this canvas, any paint can get
splattered. The paint is constantly painting over itself, and over time, the
paint starts to run in to eachother. The things in your life that used to be
pure red, and the things in your life that used to be pure blue have now been
mixed up into a purplish mixture, and it can get to the point where you don't
remembre where the purple came from, but it's there.

It's so amazing to me that such a thing happens. But it is the regular event of
the average person that something happens to them, or some thought occurs to
them which they have not thought about before, and they do not know where that
comes from.

This is the result of most of this paint being applied every day. So someone
wakes up, paints their morning routine on their canvas, and it becomes
ingrained as the picture of the mind. At the outset I want to say that this is
a good thing, as it means that the picture of the morning routine becomes a
standard pathway in the mind, and the recall ability of the brain to conjure up
this image becomes more and more efficient. However, when it comes to something
like a morning routine, the consequences of getting a certain detail wrong are
minimal. The worst thing that could happen is that you turn the water on too
hot in the shower and scald yourself when you first step in. Or you might lose
a few seconds because your keys are on the shelf, while your phone is on the
desk, so you go from your keys, to your phone, and then to outside, when it
would be more efficient to grab the phone first.

But what happens when habits like this become so ingrained, is that it becomes
commonplace to forget about the thought process that led to the creation of the
habit, and instead to just conjure up the habit as is. When this happens, the
colors that went in to the original drawing of that canvas get mixed together.
Perhaps on a refined draft of the canvas, of the picture, you had something
working efficiently. However, for some time you couldn't do it that way, so you
do it a different way. That different way becomes the habit. Then, when the
rescriction is no longer a hindrance, you still do it the different way. Later,
down teh line, you might be investigating something in your psyche, and you
might come to discover something mixed up colors, but since you have so little
mindfulness when it comes to talking about these colors, 
