So I have mostly finished reading Sam Harris's "Waking Up" book, I have just
finished reading chapter 4, and I have some things that I want to say, that
seem something like a profound understanding of what it is that he is trying to
say, and if it's not what he is trying to say, at the very least, it's what I
understand about what he is trying to say.

I also want to make some coments about Consciousness that would jive well with
my idea of "universal consciousness." Saying something like "universal
consciousness" is something that I think could be very easily misunderstood, so
I want to start to get an idea about what exactly it is I am saying, and what
exactly it is I am not saying. But enough about that, first, I just want to
talk about my reactions to reading Sam Harris's book.

So the first thing I want to say is that what he is saying is exactly the sort
of thing that I expect from a work like this. It's very clear cut, it's very
lucid. It does a magnificent job at explaining in an entirely crystal way
exactly what it is that he is trying to get at, and the only reason that it
might be misleading is due to the fact that some preconceived notion about how
the world is would be clouding the readers understanding of the words that
Harris is trying to say. In fact, I still feel that some of my preconceived
judgement about the world clouds my understanding of Harris, but writing out
things like this is my attempt at unravelling those clouds, and getting to the
heart of understanding him.

So the first parts of the books are more about the neurology than anything
else. Harris simply describes the nature of "spirituality" in a way to strip it
from it's associated dogmas, and then he goes on to talk about the different
ways in which people may talk about consciousness, and self, on varying levels,
so that there is little misconception about what exactly he means by these
things.

When Harris talks about the Consciousness, he is talk about what I refer to as
the "Inner," or the "Kaliedoscope." Those things that I talk about are what he
calls the Consciousness in his book.

There are a couple of concepts, though, that I have not thought about, and a
way of thinking about the self, which seems to me to get at the heart of what
is the purpose of meditation.

So the first thing that I learned from reading this book so far is about the
optical blind spot. I did not know such a thing existed, and I absolutely love
that it does. It is such a useful analogy for talking about these sorts of
topics, and I'm really excited about the sorts of thoughts that will arise out
of my knowledge of this blind spot existing.

Another interesting thing to talk about is the concept of the man with no head.
Again, that's another rather interesting thought experiment/way of thinking
that I feel illustrates quite what it means to think about things in terms of
"the inner."

Both of these things, though, I think are just more ways of thinking about the
inner.

I think what's most interesting, though, is the notion about the self. Of
course, I have heard Harris talk about "the self" and what that may mean, and I
have attempted to hit on the elusiveness of what "selflessness" means in
different ways, but reading this book for the first time, I feel as though I
have gotten to the point where I am beginning to understand what the object or
goal of meditation should be.

I think the most impactful phrase, at least, the phrase that resonates with me
the most, is when Harris talks about the clearness with which a good meditative
master will "cut through" the misconceptions and false ideas about meditation
that could plauge a student. The reason this resonates with me is because, I
feel as though when I read about meditaiton, and aquaint myself with the
various practices I have read about in various mediums, I am always at a loss
about what I "should" be doing while meditating. In other words, when it comes
to breathe meditation, I don't know if I should attempt to simply focus on the
breathe without having any thoughts, if I should focus on the breathe and let
the thoughts come, but just let the thoughts play "in the background" of
focusing on the breathe, or if observing the thoughts is part of the whole
experience.

It is because I am unsure of the "purpose" of meditation that I am unsure of
the exact nature of the practice.

I think a fitting analogy would be towards BJJ, where one could talk about all
of the details of finishing a triangle choke, but without the understanding of
the purpose of the triangle choke, which is to cut off the blood circulation of
the arteries of the person being choked, knowing all the details will only
leave the person in a sort of blind following of the person attempting to teach
the choke.

The thing is, someone could potentially learn how to do a triangle choke in
this way, but without the feedback of the person being choked, and without even
the knowledge of the fact that the whole point of the maneuvuer is to choke the
opponent, any succesful application of the choke would simply be coincidence.

However, if the person applying the technique knows that the whole point of
what he is trying to do is choke the other player out, and better yet, if he
knows what it feels like to be choked out, then he is able to apply that goal
to the details that the coach is giving him, and with those things together, he
will be able to refine the choke, and in a way, make it his own. In fact, he
may even discover a queue, or some other detail, that the person teaching the
choke was unaware of, and in that way he has learned not only what the
instructor has taught him, but also what his journey in learning the technique
has taught him as well.

So this is how I feel with meditation. Most of what I read about meditation has
to do with either the details of meditation, such as how to sit, what to focus
on, and so on, but there is often very little in the way of the purpose of
meditation. Usually, if there is anything on the purpose of meditation, it will
be something vague and difficult to untangle.

So that is why that line resonates with me. The purpose of meditation should be
abundantly clear. There should be no mysticism or vagueness when it comes to
understanding the goal of meditation. It may still be difficult, but it should
not be vague.

So in the mean time, between the previous paragraph and this one, I have
finished the rest of the book. I would like to continue on giving my initial
impressions and reaction to it.

So again, I would say that what this book does accomplish is that it is able to
give a rather clear account of what exactly the greatest form of "spiritual"
should mean. The last chapter was again mostly about dispelling some of the
common misconceptions about spiritalism, particularly in regards to false
teachers and gurus, and also in near death experiences and psychodelics. Harris
does a great job at explaining exactly what it is that he means, and at
concisly weeding out the other bits which are not the things that he means.

I think the best reaction that I have to this is that my motivation to pursue
meditative type practices is enhanced now having read this book. Harris
addressed my common concern with meditation, in that "it doesn't feel like
anything is happening." This goes again to the point about the purpose of a
meditative practice should be clear, and demaninding that sort of clearness is
reasonable when consulting any resources or teachers in regards to it.

Something I would still say I am left with is that I am not sure where to begin
with my meditative practice. As of this moment, I have continued along with the
idea of practicing the wim hof method of breathing in the afternoons. I will
take a few moments out of my work, about 20 or so, and I will go outside, by
the parking garage, and practice the method uninturrupted for that time. I am
doing three breathe cycles, and calling that that. It certainly has profound
effects on how I feel for the immediate time after I practice.

Something also, just as an aside, but I am certainly dedicated to now having
two meals a day, one early in the day, around eleven, and the other after BJJ.
This is most certainly beneficial to my overall energy, as I feel much better
at around three or four, and rather than panging for any sort of food, I feel
much more ready to go to BJJ and practice some.

But still, the point remains, I am not sure what to do with my meditative
practice. While I more or less understand the nature of the kind of practice
that Harris advocates for, I forget the name, but a practice where you look for
the self with the aim of continually realizing that the self is an illusion, I
still feel like having a more definite goal that something like the Wim Hof
Method of breathing provides is much more beneficial to the sort of thing that
I want to practice.

I suppose, the sort of meditation that Harris talks about is something that
does not require any sort of preamble to. I find it best to understand that
there isn't a self when I am most burdened by the self, that is, when I am
upset or angry or otherwise irritated something that has happened about my
situation. I find that time is the most beneficial to "letting go of the self"
in a way which requires mental effort.

The reason I think that one would be inclined to practice regular meditation is
that, by regularly practicing the letting go of the sense of self, you would be
more able to let go of it in those instances where it really matters. But my
issue with that is, when I am to the point where I have to let go of the self,
I don't perceive that I have much difficulty in doing so. Or rather, I
recognize it rather quickly, and I am able to recognize that some meditative
practice is in order.

I guess, something else to say is that this way of thinking is something I tend
to regularly do anyway. When I get upset or angry about something, in order to
carve a path that cuts through that anger, and in order to ensure that my
reaction to the thing that causes my anger is appropiate and unriddled and
unmuddled by my emotions, I do my best to see the situation not from the point
of view of "myself" but from the point of view of "the greater scheme of
things." Or in other words, from the point of view of the objective nature of
the universe. Seeing things in this way I think is part of being able to
discern the fact that I am dismissing the sense of self, even though, on a
certain level, I am not doing so explicitily, it is still a part of my practice
of "anger management," regardless of if I realize the metaphysical significance
of it or not.

Something also I want to touch on is a thought experiment that Sam posited
about the "teleportation device" that sends people from Earth to Mars. To
breifly go over the premise of the experiment, it basically says that in the
future, a device is created which allows a person to press a button on earth,
and the device will scan the person at the atomic level, it will store the
exact configuration of atoms at that moment, and then it will send that
information to Mars, which will then reconstruct the person using different
atoms on Mars. To the reconstructed person, when they recall their memories
(memories which have been reconstructed exactly as they were to the person on
earth), it seems as though they pressed a button on Earth, then moments later,
appeared on Mars.

The thought experiment then says to imagine a version of the machine which
waits to dissassimilate the person on earth until the person on Mars is
verified. The question then becomes, are "you" actually the person on Mars, or
the person on Earth?

So this is an interesting experiment. I've heard about this experiment before,
but in the example I have heard, it has to do with gradually replacing a boat
piece by piece until every piece of boat A has become a part of boat B, and
then we are meant to ask which boat the totally repaired boat is.

Something I want to say about this experiment is, considering that we are so
far removed from such teleportation technology, it is entirely possible that
such a device is fundamentally unable to be constructed. Of course, it is also
entirely possible that such a device is possibly able to be constructed, but we
are not sure in either case.

It reminds me of when I was a kid, and I made an argument against free will. My
argument was basically a resolution of the Grandfather paradox of Time travel.
It went something like, "Imagine that we have a Time Travel machine in which
you can go back in time. If you were to do anything which prevents you from
getting into the time travel machine, you wouldn't be able to go back in time,
so therefore you wouldn't exist in that timeline. But since you do exist, then
it must be the case that whatever you do does not alter what already happened
in any way, because if you did, it wouldn't have already happened. I concluded,
therefore, that free will didn't exist.

A bit after I formulated this argument, I then realized the flaw in it, that we
don't have a time travel machine, so any thought experiment about how the time
travel machine worked would say something about the fictional world that I
created where there is a time travel machine, rather than the world that we
live in. So the argument should go something like, "If there is such a thing as
a time travel machine, then there is no such thing as free will. However, since
we don't know whether or not such a time travel machine is possible, the
question about free will in our actual reality is still up for question."

Of course, creating a reality where a machine exists, and then making logical
suppositions which must be true based upon the existance of the machine says
only something about that alternate version of reality, rather than the actual
reality we live in. Of course, it could be possible that the alternate version
of reality coincides with the reality that we live in, but it's also just as
possible that the alternate version of reality is a seperate entity than the
reality we live and and as such abides by rules which don't apply to the
reality that we live in.

So all of that to say, it's very possible that the resolution to the thought
experiement about the machine which assimilates and dissimilates the human in a
way that allows for time travel is entirely impossible to create. It is also
the case that this is not a resolution for the experiement, and that indeed
such a machine is possible in our reality, and the exact nature of what happens
to the people who participate in the action of this machine is up for
interesting moral and epistimalogical implication about conscious life. But
it's also possible that such a machine is impossible to create, and that it
doesn't really say anything about consciousness except as a fun thought
experiment.

There is also the question of cloning. But looking into cloning, the most
famous experiment of the sort of of a sheep that was cloned, and it seems that
it wasn't constructed cell by cell, but instead, was created as a child that
grew out of the dna of another sheep. So while the "clone" is in a sense the
same person as the original sheep, it is much more akin to something like an
identical twin, the difference being that, instead of being born at the same
time, these "clones" were born six years apart.

I honestly don't know enough about biology to really say much more about the
results of cloning experiements. Most surely continued experiements such as
what was done with Dolly the sheep would be considered wildly cruel and
unethical, at least, enough so that serious scientific work on such a thing
would be greatly stunted, and even then, to say that Dolly was successfully
cloned would be something of an overstatement. It is more accurate to say that
a sheep with the same DNA as another sheep was incubated and placed in a
surregate, and that sheep bears the same genetic makeup as the original.
Obviously, such a method of "transportation" is a far cry from what is
envisioned as happening in the thought experiment.

Another way of thinking about this thought experiment, in a way which is much
more feasable by todays techonology, is to think about a machine which is able
to scan a piece of plastic, create a 3-d model of that piece, and then create a
replica of it using a 3-d printer. You could then ask if the replica is the
same as the thing which was origianlly scanned.

Of course, the answer is no. No matter how precise the 3-d printer is,
pragmatically speaking, there is no feasable human way to get every detail of
every nook and cranny of the original object to appear on the replica, down to
the lowest nano-meter. Such a feat would be a marvoulous expenditure of
engineering.

But we can suppose that, for the sake of arguing here, that by some crazy fluke
accident, that every alignment of every molecule was in the exact same initial
configuration of the thing which we are comparing. There would be no way to
know this for certain, because out insturments would not be able to detect such
a thing, but we can suppose that it is there.

The question is still, again, whether or not the thing is the same or not from
the original.

Of course, the answer now depends on what we mean by "the same." If you were to
construct a room, and place both objects in the room, the objects would be in
different physical location of the room. One would be on pedastal A, and the
other would be on pedastal B. And because they are in different locations, you
would have to argue that they are different things.

But what we could also say is that we place the first object on pedestal A, and
then remove it, and then place the second object also on pedestal A. Now, you
could say, the only difference between the two objects is time. So you could
imagine that there is a device which takes a perfect snapshot of reality for
one instant in time. Again, ignoring teh implications of the fact that such a
"reality capturing" device is rather implausible to exist, let's just say that
all we had to look at was a snapshot of the pedastal when the first object was
on it, and a snap shot of the pedastal when the second object was on it.

WHen we look at teh two snapshots, we would say that reality is exactly the
same in first snapshot, as it is in the second. That is certain. So we would
ask whether or no the objcet in the first snapshot is the same as the object in
the second.

I think the conclusion we have to draw from these thought experiments is that
it takes more than just a configuration of molecules in space to identify an
object as distinct from another.

--

So right now I feel like typing in teh dark. I like typing in teh dark,
becauese, you don't have to worry about typing things wrong or spelling
anything in a way that doesn't  make asny sennces. It itsuns out usually when I
go abck and read these thinging after I type thiem in the dark like this
without owrkinging about what thit sayss or what it looks like or anything of
that nature, I read in itback and itu  usuually pretty readaable, fro the most
part.s So that mebing sayid, I dido foeeel ilke I need to reinfn in t in a
littel bit, aond start tying in a way that does'nt make me feel like I am just
flailing all over the kee.eyobrard right now. Of course, you could argue that
that doestn matetter and that I shuold be jsut typing with out regoard for waht
it it s atht aI am putting ont hepage. But at the same time, you could argue
that I should eb workrynning about what goes on here, and insetad of pretending
that I am suome super typnig master, I colud just stop for a momen t and
thukniy about the places that my fingers are going. I don'tk hknow how I feel
about this level, or lacke of level, of preciesiton in whiat it is athoa t Iam
am typping. It's rathe disconcertinig.

So with that all being said, I do feel like I do want to say something. That
is, I don't know what it is taht I have to say, but it it samething atht has
teo get out of here. Of course, I always feel ilike that, but mybe this time it
is sometihng else which is making fmee feel iths way. Not really though, it's
just a bmatter afof personal opinoino .Not opionon though. It's rather,
something that sneed s to be ndone and said. THat is, right now I don't feel
like this needs to mbe said, but instead that this is something tah t neeeds to
be getton out. I mean, sometimes it feels like thiere is something that needs
to be soaid. but then I right now I don't have that feeling. Right now I just
feel like typing a bunvch of random nonsense and having it come out ono a page
and having this be something that I probabl y never ever reade again. So yeah.
It's not like there is osmeithn gta t need s to be soaid., rather, it',s just
that I feel like typing something right now, but I doon't really have anything
in aparticutlar that I want to ytpe out, so instead of typing out something
about my theought s in teh moment right now, I am instead just masmhing wildly
on my keyborad in the dark for no real reaoson.


So enough of that, let's actually get to saying something. Nickolas has been
triting a story lately about  a guy and a boat and a girl and a rock and
amountanion and all of this sort of stuff, and I must say wthat while the story
is proving te be somewhat intesretansithng, I will asy that it seems to be
lakcing sometihng. What exacttly it is lacking, I don't know, but it is most
certainly lakcing osmetihng. It's lakcing a sort of personality to it that I
feel likec is missing.

In other news, I made a poste or redditec/lmo / rpenpalls, and I made it os
that anyone who wants to have long for mdisscustison s about the nature of th
uunuversee can come up and talk to me about the nature of the uniutenvese. I am
not soo keen on my poste ,btu it it s now there out inthe world ,fro every one
to see.

In more oother news, I havea new mech, and I am typing on it. I like it alot,
excetp f oth eth fack that the spacebar seems to kind of stick, I'm not so fand
of theat., but besidost that this things i like a dream,. Willeel, excetp fo
the tfact that the u and h jkeys, jk don't have th e littel tick bamrkes that f
and j keys usualy have. Granted, it might njust be semetihng that takes some
getting used tio, but to be honest, since I am typing int he dark, I don'tk
konw if I am missing the keys entierly right now. It's hard to say.

What is something else I want to asy.

I think this is a poor form of moeditation. I am focusing onso ard on typing
the words that I want to ytpep, and makisg sure not to get them precisely
wrong, or in other words, I am spending so much time on getting them right that
I man not really thinking aobut the words that are entireing my head. Perhaps
talking in tounguse would be a better approach to this kind of verbal wihte
noisje.


