So I am going to keep this article short, mostly because it's late and I should
get to bed.

Two things real quick.

I have decided to try and make an effort towards meditation. 15 minutes a day
for now should suffice, and I'll see what sorts of results I will have. I have
decided not to stress too much about exactly how I'm sitting, or whether or not
I'm doing it right. I'm just going to let it happen.

So something happened to me while I was meditating. I got an idea. The idea
just came out of nowhere while I was focusing on my breathe. The idea was this.

I want to write an opinion piece about myself, framed in the worst possible
light. I want to frame myself in the worst possible light that I possibly can,
as if there is some crazed journalist out there that wants to "expose me" for
what I am. Obviously, there will be an element of humor in it, but I will write
it as if I am a journalist without any tongue in cheek sarcastic statements at
all.

I'm not sure to what degree this makes sense at all to do. It must indicate
something psychologically that is happening to me. But the idea came up when I
was meditating, and I did the best I could to "catalog it away" so that I could
let go of it and focus on the breath again.

Which I guess is part of what I feel weirdly about when meditating. Suppose I
am in the middle of a session, and all of a sudden, as I am focusing on the
breathe, or some aspect of the body, or something similar, I suddenly have a
revalation. Maybe I'm a biological chemist, and I come up with some
revolutionary idea which will revitalize the way that we treat and think about
cancer. It's some hunch that I have been working on for the past decade, and I
think the missing piece to all of my research just comes to me in the middle of
my meditation session.

However, I know myself, and as I am observing my breath, and I get distracted
by this thought, I also know that if I forget about it, and continue to think
about the breath, I will forget the revalation. Suppose it's a sort of break
through that is esoteric at first, and it's not until you really work it
through and get all of the math down that you know it will truly be a
breakthrough.

Should I forget about this thought, because it is a distraction from the task
at hand? It would seem, from a certain ponit of view, that to neglect such a
thought, and to just focus on the breathe while the thought flutters away would
be something like a disservice. Especially if time is of the essence.

I could come up with another example, but it's not crystallizing in my head.
I'll leave it for now.

That's all I wanted to say really.
