So yesterday I had the idea that I wanted to write an article as if it were
meant to slander me. I am going to give a go at that attempt right now.

On the surface, Brett Webster seems like a rather typical man. He has a job, he
has hobbies, and he generally keeps to himself. But when we dig a little bit
closer into this mans past, and really look at how he thinks, we start to
uncover something much more sinister. This article is my attempt to expose this
man for the disgusting and selfish human being that he is.

Before we can get to talking about the atrocities that he has commited, and the
dangerous philosophy that he espouses, let's go through first a bit of a
biographical account of his workings. Brett was born in Dallas texas to Ann and
Jerry Webster in Feburary of 1991. He took on a normal childhood for the first
parts of his life, but even as an infant in play groups he would be known to
bully and show aggressive behaviors to other children around him. He was
protective of his toys, and would attack any child that would attempt to play
with those toys with him. His parents enrolled him in gymnastics when he was
four. His time in gymnastics seemed innocuous enough, but again, we see under
the surface some alarming behavior. There are not many accounts of his time in
gymnastics, but we have found one account of the sort of behavior he would
exhibit. When he was learning a new skill, the so called "giant" on the high
bar, he showed a complete lack of desire to complete the skill. His coach,
knowing that Brett had the ability to complete the move, told him one day that
he was not going to baby sit him anymore, and told him to stay on the highbar
apparatus until he did it. The coach then walked away. Brett, looking at the
apparatus, decided that he would continue to attempt, and fail, the giant, just
to spite the wisdom of his coach. It is unsure to what degree Brett knew that
he had the capability to do the giant, but he gathered the resolve to not learn
the giant because he was simply upset about his coach seeing the potential in
him that was unrealized. While this is only one account of Brett's stubborness,
it is no doubt that certain themes would be seen throughout his gymnastics
career. As a result, Brett developed a level of mediocrity that

So I started this, and I quickly became disturbed by it. Or maybe I was just
getting bored. It's not as inspired as I thought it might be. I don't know. I'm
having a rather bleh day, and for the most part I don't know why, and writting
this wasn't doing anything to help.

Perhaps I could write a bunch of stuff here just because I can. I don't want
to write, and I don't want to work either. I have spent most of the day
browsing Reddit, and watching youtube. It's sort of gross, to be honest. I have
done zero actual work in the six or so hours that I have been at work today.
