So last night I had many dreams, but I don't remember most of them. The one I
do remember, I don't remember much of, but I will hit the high points, followed
by the ending, which was rather strange to say the least.

So this dream starts in a mall like area. I am in the mall area of my dreams,
and I go into a particular room, a room I've been in before. Basically, the way
this mall works, is that there is a center hub area, which is like the entrance
to the mall, and then there are directions in which the mall comes out from
this hub.

So I go into the mall, and I go to a sort of carpet/furniture section. When I
go in, I start looking around, and an attendent asks me if I need anything. I
say that no, I'm just looking, but thank you. However, he continues to try and
pester me and help me, and I become nervous about him.

So at this point, I don't really remember the details of the dream. I remember
there was something about gettings something, nad going to an entire nother
area of the mall in a car, or something. I end up going back to the main area,
and I run across some old school video games, like nes and snes era, with the
old tube tvs and such. I remember leaving with two things, first, it was these
video games, and then it was some ski's with attached boots.

So when I get out, I start to try and play the games, and I notice that the tv
and games are not working like they should. I think this is indicative of how
good the boots and skis are. If teh games aren't of high quality, the boots and
skis probably are not either. Still, I put the boots and skis on, and I go up
to the top of a hill.

So now, it is hard to describe exactly what is going on with this hill. It
starts in the bottom left, and that is the highest point, and it goes down into
a crevice. In this crevice, there are a bunch of smaller hills that I can ski
down. Then, towards the bottom, there are a bunch of cliffs, and these cliffs
go off with rather far drops into water. But the cliffs are grass and dirt
cliffs. Also, in the water, there are more cliffs that act as something like
islands.

So I am skiing down, and as I start to approach the bottom, sure enough, the
boots start to fail on me, and detach from the skis. But I can still ski down
enough just on the boots, but I don't have as much control. I then go to
something of a jump, and I jump, and I end up on one of these islands, where I
come to a stop.

When I am stopped there, I analyze my situation. I am on an island, and I want
to get back to the main land. The boots are weighing me down, so I take them
off. I then decide that I can jump into the water, and swim back to land. I see
a patch of land that is rather close. I notice I am naked at this point as
well, but I don't think much of it.

So I jump into the water, and I'm not sure how deep it is. On teh first jump, I
go in, and I swim back to the surface. I surface, and I actually fly quite high
out of the water, high enough that I know my penis was above water. I take a
deep breath, and I know I will go under again when fall back down. I fall back
down, and go under. This time, I am very curious about how deep the water is,
so I go down a little bit. I start to run out of air though, so I decide I
should go back up, but before I do, I think that I might be close to the
bottom, and I would get up faster if I was abel to kick off of teh bottom. So I
go down a little more, but I don't find the bottom, I only touch my feet and
encounter some algea there. So I start to swim back up, and I am really running
out of breathe. And I remember thinking, "I can't breathe in, if I breathe in,
I die." So I contiuned to hold my breathe, but just before I was able to reach
the surface, I inhaled. As soon as I inhaled, I wasn't above the surface, so I
inhaled water and woke up right away.

That was the dream. It was rather startling to wake up like that. I don't think
I physically inhaled when I woke up, but I definitely felt shocked when I did.
