So yesterday I went to the six am morning BJJ class for the first time. After
that, I went to work, took a shower in the work showers, and then made my way
up to the office. We worked as we do. In the morning, I asked Chris if I could
join him in his workout. He said that he was not working out because he had to
go to lunch with an interviewee that we were having that day, but that Luis
might. So I asked Luis if I could join him in the workout, and he said sure.

But then, later in the day, Luis said that his kid and wife are both at home
sick, and that he has to take the afternoon off. I said that it's cool. Luis
left around one.

So around three, I went downstairs to work out. I ran a mile at about a ten
minute pace, then I did some of the Bikram poses. After that, I did some
pullups and handstand pushups. I then cooled down with a light jog at an eleven
minute pace.

After that, I took another shower in the work showers, and went back upstairs
to continue to not really work on anything.

I then went to the main class, and really went after it. I stayed intense on
the drills, and I really gave myself in the rounds. I made sure that I pushed
myself to the point of exhaustion so that I could work inside of that space.

From there, I drove back to my apartment, drank about a quart and a half of
milk with chocolate syrup, and proceeded to collapse onto my mat on the floor
and fall to sleep hard.

In the night, I woke up twice. The first time I woke up, I could feel that I
was a touch uncomfortable and I conjectured that it was something about the
hormones in my digestive cycle of the milk. I was fortunately able to
immediately return to sleep.

The second time I woke, I was very hungry. I considered getting up and eating
some food, but decided against it. I fell asleep again.

The last time I woke up, it was time to wake up for work. I had fallen asleep
by 9:30 and woke up at 7:30. And for this one it was legit 9:30 falling asleep
time.

I have been at work now for two hours, and have done little more than browse
reddit. I need to stop. I'm stopping that now. I need to work on things for
work.
