So today, I don't have much that I want to talk about. It seems to be the case
that, for some time now, I have been not having many dreams. I think this is
for a couple reasons. First, with the FODP program ending, I am no having as
clear or vivid dreams as I have been having.

But I have discovered something else. So the thing is, now that I no longer
have to abstain from marijuana, I have noticed that it is the case that I still
have dreams when I sleep. The difference is, those dreams are so much less
colorful, or presentable. It's almost as if the amount that I am tripping
before, compared to the amount that I am tripping during a dream are so strong
in comparison to eachother, that teh derams basically just takes the lazy way,
and it says, "And here is a sort of outline of what I wanted to think about or
something, here you go" So I don't get a dream, instead, I just get a strange
feeling or an abstract idea at night, instead of a full on dream.

This has the advantage that there is much less information to be unpacked.
Generally, these sorts of dreams are very straightforward, and I understand
them when I am having them. But the down side is, now I don't have really cool
and memorable stories for me to tell back to myself at a point later in the
day. I could write something like, "I had a vague feeling of warmth in the
night last night, but that's it," but there would be no real point in writing
that. Even so, I have noticed that, as I am waking up, I am truly having
something like a dream. It's more like a daydream that leads down multiple
trains of thought, and eventually, you don't remember how the trains of thought
were genearated, so then, when you snap to, you totally forget not only the
thing you were thinking about, but also you don't even know the thing that led
to the thing you were thinking about. This is what waking up from one of these
dreams is like. It's as if I had memory of the dream when I was dreaming, then
as soon as I wake up, my dream goes away, but the memory that I at least had a
dream, and that if I remembered it I could potentially write it down, are at
least still there. The thing is, no amount of remembering really hard at that
point is going to get me to remember the dream, so usually what I do at that
point is just wake up and go about my day. No reason to dwell upon it.

So that's what my dreams have been like for the past week or so now.

I know I have decided on other stories to write about. I just finished writing
about something else, it was a good story about the origin of Jesus. I think I
have just started writing about Adam and Eve. I think their story is rather
important as well. I also want to write about the Iliad as well. I find it
interesting that the story is so archaic, and yet it is still considered a
modern classic of sorts. Of course, what we have today is something strange in
comparison to how it was told across generations, but the fact that a story
like that was told is something strange for sure. I also want to write an
excerpt of one of Ulysses stops along his way back home. I think they missed
one, and I want to add it in retroactively. Of course, I have no qualifications
to do so, but it's there regardless.

So Adam and Eve.

The story of Adam and Eve is an interesting one, and the reason I find it
interesting is because it satisfies a way of thinking about human beings that
is in some way ego centric. From the Adam and Eve story, we get a story that we
could very easily imagine ourselves in, and the fall that they take is
something like the most interseting fall that we have ever felt. It's the
ultimate fall, and as such, we feel it as much as we can empathize with them.
In that way, we fall with Adam, and with Eve, in this story. The world is so
pure, and our knowledge is so naive, that we don't have any idea what it means
to eat the apple as we did.

So the story of Adam and Eve actually starts not "once upon a time" because it
starts before Time even existed. The person who is usually known as "Our Father
in Heaven" but more affectionately named "Steve" for anthromorphization decides
that he wants to create a universe. Steve has just been bogged down with this
whole, "War in Heaven," and he is glad because his Son was able to overthrow
one of the angels that wanted to rise up against him. Of course, the fact that
there are angels who are angry at Steve is disconcerting to Steve, but he
doesn't think much of it. He decides, now that that is done and over with, that
he wants to create a universe.

So Steve gathers the appropiate materials to create a universe, as Divine
Creators do. He take a little bit of cardboard, and a little bit of elmers
glue, and some sprinkles with a pen, and using all of taht, he constructs for
himself his very own universe.

Of course, no universe is complete without some critters in it. So he takes
some lions from the lions bin, and some tigers from the tiger bin, and he
places them into his panarama. Finally, he decides that he wants to create one
more creature, and he wants to put them in a beautiful garden in one of the
corners of this place.

So these two creatures, they become conscious, and Steve looks at the things
that he created, and he says to himself, "Wow, I didn't expect them to be
conscious, that was unexpected." But still, now that the humans are conscious,
he speaks to them, and he says, "Greetings humans, my name is Yahweh," (Steve
just made up a name for himself because he never liked the name Steve) ", I
created your garden, and I created you. You are divine, and you are Humans. You
are the greatest thing I have created. Now go forth, and eat of the fruit of
the garden."

And then Yahweh gave pause. He saw that, in his panorama, he still left a
quantum flux generator in the middle. It would be some time before he would be
able to edit it out, and he knew that if his humans interacted with it, crazy
shit could happen, so he turns again to the humans, and says, "So I'm not
entirely done making this univese yet, I just put you guys in it to sort of
test drive what I've got so far. But the garden here is mostly stable, there's
just this one tree that you can't eat from. I'll work on removing the tree, and
until then, just hang tight and eat of the fruit of all the other fruit."

So Adam and Eve are left sitting there, by themselves. They talk among
themselves. Adam and Eve both agree that they are the only humans in existance,
in a garden that was built by some sort of demigod that can talk to them. They
begin to eat some of the fruit, and it all tastes delicious. One day, Adam asks
Eve, "What do you think is the deal with the fruit in the forbidden tree?"

Eve replies, "Oh, I'm sure it's probably nothing. Besides, even if it were
something, we have so many other fruits to eat from, we have no need to bother
ourselves with the one tree that is off limits."

"Still," Adam continued, "It seems strange that an all knowing all benevolent
being would put a tree that we weren't allowed to eat from in teh middle of our
garden. For what purpose could he have done so? There must be a reason. Perhaps
he actually wants us to eat of the tree. What sorts of knowledge do you think
it contains?"

Eve was unamused by this question. She just replied, saying, "Why would I know?
Or why should we care? We have no reason to eat from that tree, because these
tree provide all that we know."

So Adam and Eve continued for a while, eating of the fruit of the Garden, and
comparing experiences of eating with eachother.

Eventually, after quite some time, Adam again says to Eve, "I grow tired of
eating this fruit day after day. I long for something different. Sure, there
are many different types of fruit in different kinds of trees, but it is all
begining to taste the same to me. I wonder if the forbidden fruit tastes any
different than the fruit of the garden."

And Eve consoled Adam, saying, "But Adam, there is no garuntee that the fruit
is any different. For all we know it tastes exactly the same. We promised our
creator that we would avoid the fruit out of the forbidden tree, and that's
what we should do."

Adam accepted this, but thought about it. Some time later, he comes to Eve, and
he says, "Let's make a deal. If one of us eats of the fruit of the forbidden
tree, the other one must follow suit."

Of course, Eve was upset, and said, "Absolutely not! I am by no means going to
be tempted to eat of the forbidden tree, and I don't want to be lured in by you
by some promise that we make together. I am not eating of that tree, and that's
final!"

So Adam recoiled again, and attempted his best to get the forbidden fruit out
of his mind.

One day, as they were tending to the Garden, Adam and Eve split up, as they
often times do throughout the day. Adam was working on the forest, while Eve
was working in the shrubbary. Eve would gather the berries, and adam would
gather the large fruit, and they wwould bring their spoils together to their
cottage at the end of the day and exchange food.

While they were out gathering, Adam saw in the distance, an angelic figure. The
angelic figure spoke. "I am Rapheal. I have come from God to inform you of the
status of this world. There is nothing to be alarmed of."

Rapheal then proceeds to tell Adam about the War in Heaven that took place
between Steve and his adversary. Of course, Rapheal does not call him Steve,
but he describes to Adam in the words that Adam can understand, the conflict
between Steve and his enemy. Because of this, Raphael tells Adam, Steve's enemy
is not so keen on Steve just making a world with humans in it. Raphael warns
Adam that the enemy has disguised himself as a serpent, and made his way into
the garden. Of course, such a state of things is not ideal, but in the mean
time, Raphael just wants Adam to know that the serpent cannot possibly harm the
humans unless the humans interact with it, and believe it's lies.

After Rafael told all of this to Adam, he leaves off with a word of warning.
Adam thanks Rafael for the heads up, and proceeds to continue harvesting fruit.

When Adam gets back to his cottage, Eve is there, and she is holding an apple.
As soon as Adam walks in, Eve begins to talk, "Oh Adam, how good it is to see
you. You were right! The fruit of the tree of knowledge is so much better than
the fruit we are eating now. Let me tell you. When I was tending to the shrubs,
I saw on the ground next to me, a serpent. Of course, like all serpents, I
thought very little of this one, and had decided to just let it slither past me
as most of them do. But all of a sudden, this serpent got up on it's tail, and
it began speaking to me. It asked me, 'Eve, do you want to partake of the tree
of life?'. Of coures, at first I was startled, and said, 'You can talk?' and
the serpent replied, 'Yes, I can indeed.'

"When I pressed it further, it told me that it ate of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge, and because of taht, it was given access to things that it shouldn't
know. The serpent then told me that all of these things are good. The problem
is that Yahweh left the tree there on accident, and that he doesn't want us to
eat of it because it will let us see things as Yahweh does. But I can assure
you, Adam, all of it is a lie, the fruit reveals things for how they truly are,
and now that I have eaten it, I see that we were foolish to be afraid of it.
Eat of it with me, and gain the knowledge that I have with me."

At this, Adam replied, "Oh Eve, what terrible news this is. Just this morning,
I was visited by an angel named Raphael, and he told me that the enemy of our
creator was roaming about our garden as a snake. Raphael told me that all we
had to do was resist the words of the snake and we would be okay. But when I
come home, I am greeted not by a snake, but by the apple of the forbidden
fruit. How am I to make this decision? My wife has eaten the fruit. This is too
much to bear. What am I to do? We did not make a promise, but I feel compelled
to eat with you."

And Eve replied, "I can tell you, the anguish in decision that you feel right
now will feel small in comparison to the knowledge you will gain by eating this
fruit. We were meant to eat this fruit, Adam, and I can feel it. I understand,
this fruit is who we are. You merely make your choices due to your rational
mind, but when you eat the fruit, you will see that there are entirely new
dimensions to existance which you are unable to grasp. I am asking you to eat
the fruit not because I did, but because I know that it would be good for you
as it has been good for me."

And so Adam ate the fruit.

--

All right, so at this point, it's pretty clear where the story goes. Well, it's
not the obvious textbook adam and eve story, so it might not be entirely clear
if you have that one stuck in your head, and you refuse to listen to any other
version. But if you think about it just like any other story, maybe it's
something like a fan fiction of the Adam and Eve story.

That's why fan fiction exists, right.

Anyway, I just wanted to get out that I have already thought of a new idea for
my next fan fiction should be. I would like there to be a debate between Seth
and Cain. Cain argues in favor of forgiveness, and Seth argues against. Both
make great points to their cause. Unlike the more dramatic Cain and Abel story,
the lesser known Cain and Seth story is much more explicit in it's intentions,
and tells a much deeper story than the original can fathom. Unfortunately, this
story has been lost in the dead sea scrolls, and it's rumored that it might
not even exist at all. However, in the spirit of fan fiction, I find it my job
to write what inspires me to think about this story.

--

So I do want to now begin the debate of Seth and Cain. Of course, this debate
took place after the murder, and that murder was the primary topic of the
debate.

The debate merely heald two people, namely, Cain and Seth. They did not have
"sides" or "votes", there was no "audience" and given the nature of the last
dispute amongst brothers, it was entirely possible that this debate could have
ended in murder. However, this debate is lesser known because it did not end in
murder, but instead in mutual understand.

However, in order to tell the story as it should be told, we must add theses
things. We must add an audience, we must add camera's, we must add an orator,
and all of these other things. We can't just tell the story as it is, because
that does not contain the drama of the way it should be told.

So when the debate begins, Cain had, in the past, killed his brother Abel.
Later, Adam and Eve had a thrid child, and they named him Seth. Seth began to
grow up, and by the time he was a teenager, he wanted answers to questions he
had abotu his brother Cain. At the time, Seth only knew him as "The one the
parents never talk about."

Well, sure enough, when Seth becomes old enough to begin to think for himself,
he comes to his parents, and he says, "I want to know about Cain. Tell me, what
happened between Cain and my Brother Abel?"

And so his parents told him the story. First, they had Cain, and Cain was very
good at hunting and gathering meat. After some time, the parents decided to
have another child. This child they called Abel. Cain liked Abel, and even
helped him in his upbringing.

But it so turned out that Abel was very good at gathering crops, where as Cain
was much better at hunting. Eventually, the parents start to object to Cain
killing as much as he is, because Abel is able to provide a much more ethical
meal. So of course, Cain confronts Abel. He tells him that his sacrifice of
wheat should not be worth more than the sacrifice of a goat. Of course, the
sacrifice of the goat would be better than some grain.

But Abel disagreed, to the point of saying that Cain was worthless. They had no
need for killing, only for harvesting and growing, and that if he loved
himself, or the family, he would put down his axe, and take up his hand in
farming.

Cain, of course, was deeply insulted by this, and he made this point to his
brother. He said, "The reason you can safely gather crops and feed them to
mother and father is because I am out here, protecting you from the wild and
dangerous beasts. So while my killing my be to gather meat, that is only
secondary from the proteciton I provide."

At this point, Abel was indignant, and told him that he was sure he could do
just fine without Cain.

Cain, wanting to demonstrate his sheer unrivaled strength in comparison to
Abel, picked Abel up, and threw him into the forest. He gave him a sword, and
said, 'This bear wants to kill you, defend yourself from it.' Of course, Abel
was too weak, and the bear overpowered him. Cain came up laughing from behind,
and says, 'No, silly brother, you don't let the bear attack you, you instead
hit it in it's vital points, here, here, and here." Cain quickly makes quick
work of the bear and picks up his brother.

But instead of helping his beaten brother up off the ground, Cain realized that
he was pulling all of the weight of a totally limp corpse. The bear had mauled
Abel, and Cain did not expect the bear to overtake Abel so easily. He was
merely making a point in their debate, and he payed for it with Abel's life.

When he returned to his parents, they told him never to come back again.

So Cain went out, and Adam and Eve had another child Seth.

This is fourteen years after those events, when Seth finally gets to meet Cain
for the first time. They met in private, just the two of them, and they had
this conversation.

Cain was the first to speak. He asked, "So do you gather the crops for mom and
dad as Abel did before you?"

Seth gathered his energy to reply. This was the first human he had ever talked
too besides his mom and dad. He said, "Yes, I do manage the farms. I will also
fend of the village from wild animals when neccesary, but my day to day life is
in the farms."

Cain nodded. "Interesting, so you know how to handle yourself then? That's much
better than our brother Abel."

Seth winced. Already in the conversation, Cain was bringing up Abel. Seth was
curious. "What was Abel like? Tell me, what kind of man was he before you
killed him?"

Cain glared back at Seth. Young, but snarky. "I like you. You're straight
forward, and to the point. That's good to see."

"You didn't answer my question. What was Abel like?"

"Ha, I see you are ever indignant. You want to know what our brother was like,
I will tell you.

"He was a farming man. He spent all his time out in the farms, plant seeds,
tilling soil, and pruning crops. He made it his thing that he does all day,
every day. When he was not farming, he was either eating the crops he did grow,
or he was sleeping. But many times, in the night, he would wake up, and just
"check" on his crops. He was nearly mental with how often he checked on them.

"And they would grow wonderful harvests. The most full and bountiful harvests
you could imagine. Yes, some good bread."

Cain started to drift off.

"Why did you kill him?" Seth asked

"I did not kill him. A bear killed him. I told him to fight the bear and show
me that he was capable like a man to protect the family, and then he fought the
bear and died. He was weak. It was unfortunate. My parents, ..., our parents
argued that I could have protected Abel from harm, but I told them that he was
being indignant, and that I was trying to make a point. I honestly did not
think that he was so weak as to die from a bear when he was armed with a sword.
It's quite a level of incompetence that I quite frankly did not realize could
exist. So in taht way, Abel killed himself by not being prepared to fight when
he was required."

Seth thought for a moment. He then replied, "So where does that leave you?
After all, even though you didn't technically kill him, you were the one that
placed him in the position that he died in. His blood is still on your hands.
What do you have to say for yourself there?"

Cain replied again, "As I see it, I can't dwell on what happened in the past. I
could not have known that he was so weak that he could die to a bear, and so
now I understand that not all humans are created with the same facilities as
everyone else. I understand that about you now as well. If only I had known
that about Abel at that point, I would not have told him to fight that bear,
but I could not have known that. And regardless, had I not forced him into that
fight, he would have eventually run into some sort of wild creature and failed
to fight it and die. After all, I could not always be around him to protect
him, that would be silly. The man would have died by a bear in one way or
another anyway."

"And how do they stand right now?" Seth asked.


