So this is something that I want to do just so that I am doing it. I want to be
writing, and thinking about things to write, and so on, for some time now, just
so that I have something to make it look like I am actually doing something
with my time. Really, what I sohuld be doing with my time is figuring out the
thing with the case that I am doing right now. IT's a system event, I am adding
to the system, and so I need to figure out about how system events work, and
what they do, and so on. That is something thta I could get done by the end of
the day today if I actually got on to it.

I am in this weirld place of just wanting to watch videos on youtube or browse
things on reddit. Literally the last thing that I want to do right now is set
up data to throw system events in the background worker and see how it works. I
don't care how it works. I don't give any shits about how Alliant throws system
events. It's not applicabale to anything else. I want to work somewhere else.
Because working here really is not enjoyable.

This isn't where I wanted my train of thought to go though. I wanted it to go
somewhere else. Mostly, I wanted it to go to a story. But I don't really want
to write a story right now.

I have mostly gotten out a good working draft of the Cain and Seth story. Or, I
suppose, I have gotten to the point where I have most of the original material
for it written out. I am still missing the material for a certain point of the
dialouge. The conversation that they have takes a sudden turn near the end, and
all of the ending I like as the ending, but it feels like there needs to be
something in the middle. I think, it has to do with the exact nature of the
Cain and Abel story. But beyond that, most of it is written out.

There might be even more to say about this story, but I am not sure how much of
it will go in to the final product.

I think what I should do is write material, and have it in a sort of "Material
bin" When it's like this, I could then take something like an outline, and draw
out the material from the "material bin" and then from there, I could touch up
the story, and make sure everything transitions from one scene to the next.

I think, the main sticking point that has been towards me in the past for this
sort of notion is that I don't tend to be the most inspired when thinking about
things in terms of "this scene." In other words, I spend much more time
thinking about the high level things than I do actually writing out the
material. My process has always involved having some sort of crystalized idea
in my head, and then getting out the material so that it's something of a gem
when it comes out. But the problem with this method is that the amount of
mental energy to crystialize an idea before you write any of it out is large.
So the payoff in the other direction is that typing takes energy, and so this
becomes something of a balance between the mental energy of typing compared
with the mental energy of fathoming an elaborate world for my character to live
in. In an ideal world, the typing time and energy could be considered
"negligable" and the rest of the energy would be able to go towards thinking
through things and how they should go. But that would take much less energy
because the material is already typed out.

So I think, what I am getting at here, is that there is an energy and time cost
associated with typing, and that is outweighed by the energy cost of
crystallizing an idea before any words are written. I think, it's important to
undersell the cost of typing and oversell the importance of crystallizing. In
other words, we want to say that typing is "little effort" and that coming up
with lines and lines of material, even if it's not going to be used in the
final product in it's current form, or at all, is "the easy part," where as the
hard part is in putting together all of these things into a cohesive narrative.
The important thing to remember, though, is that by expending time and effort
in to "the easy part," the hard part comes with much less mental energy. So in
order to minimize costs here, what we need to remember is something like, "Type
it all out, and Frankenstien it together later."
