So right now, I am to the point where I have my head rested non the table, and
I have the rest oy my hands and fingers restend on these cloths, which then
lead bmy heands to go inseide the keyboard in this certain kind of way, and
when it does that, I get to a point where I am able to get to this kind of flow
state with my words.

So now that I have entered tha flow state, I am working on coming up with
something to say as far as my reading is concerned. 

Aso f right nigow. I am reading Elantris, and I must say that the book is so
far saping up to be at the very least einteresting. 

I think this work shows more stubtleties in Sanderson's work, and I like it.
But sitll, it's something interesting.

I like it so far because he has started off three threads in the firlst five
chapters. First, is the thread with Raoden, then the thread with the girl, and
then th ethread wwith teh priest. I don't rewmembet the names, but that is why
I annotate my files as I read the work.

Okay, so I am done resting my head for the moment, but I am not done closing my
eyes. Ia m very stiff in the neck and everywhere in the body. I want to go
upsidedown and fucking ripp my neck off and put it back on straight after it
airs out for a  bit.

Unforntately, I can't let my spine bathe in a vat of chemical bliss, so the
bset I can do is yoga.

But yoga is difficult.

Yoga also works better with marijuana, but the thing is, it also works better
without it. There are waysthat it works better with both things, and i think
that the ways that you learn with in are better than the way that you learn
without it, but the way you perform and operate with it is worse than the way
you do it without it.

All of that to say, I have opened my eyes now irl, and I am now watching the
words as I type thme. I am letting my stream of thought just flow out of my
fingers, and I am letting myself get to a word count which I would find
acceptatble to type in this amount of time.

I am tempted to go over to youtbue and find some sort of music video to watch,
but I think that such a distraction would be not prudent to the task at hand.

I have not officially started any sort of "practice" per se, but I do know that
i have some time here to sit and work on my writing, so whether or not it's
official, it's still helping none the less.

So with all of that being said, I still haven't fully decided what it is that I
want to write about.

I could write about Elantris. That would be easy to do. Actually, now that I
say that, as I am thinking through all of the other options, I think the first
option that came to mind when I really stopped and thought about it was the
correct one.

So Elantris.

Elantris is interesting so far. I have read to this point five chapters. I have
been introduced to the Prince of the Place, some guy he meets in Elantris, and
three gang leaders. This was across chapters one and four.

In chapters two and five, we focused on the girl. I forget her name, but she
was the princess of a neighbor, and she was to marry the prince, but of course,
he is in Elantris. So we follow her, as she gets to know the princes family.
The king and queen are strange, but even worse is the High Priest (who we met
in chapter 3). She finds comfort in finding her uncle in Chapter 4, and
proceeds to make acquantiance with his entire family.

In chapter three, we have been introduced to the high priest of the religion
that is to bring armegeddon in to the world and scourge the world of the plauge
of pagans and etc. and so forth. This high priest effectively declares
aggression towards the king in chapter four, but the reader is exposed to a
more sinister plot going on in the High Priests mind.

So far, these are the three threads that I am meant to follow.

At the present moment, I don't know if I want to continue reading this work, or
continue writing as I am right now.

So the argument for writing is that I am currently doing it, and that I am
currently quite very much on a role when it comes to writing fast and
effectively.

I am watching the words I type go by, and as I do, I can't help but feel that
it is somehow the delayed reaction of my pure stream of consciousness coming
out on to the screen.

okay, well, I slowed down because I have lost a stream of consciousness and I
am slowing down because I don't have much to write. However, just because i
don't have much to write doesn't mean I don't want to write at all. in fact,
Ithink it is important to remmebr cthat writing is somethnig thta I do for the
sake of doing it, and no one has to read what I have written.

All of that being said, I think I am finished with Elantris right now. If I am
to continue, I should stop, and come up with another train of thought to
follow.


