So right now I want to take a moment to re coop myself, regather my senses,
find out where I am, and move from there.

I want to mention that I talked to Evan today. I find it amusing, because I
re-read all ninety pages of my Seth and Cain Novella, and everything that I
said in that work was condensed down to one discussion with Evan. That was it.

We took a walk around Duck Creek, in the evening after dark (which I feel is
appropiate) and I pretty started by just talking about what I had been up to
for a while, and then I went on to say something to the effect of "When I was
your age, and I was in your position, and I was trying to find myself, and
find out who I was and what I wanted to do with my life, I wish I would have
had someone tell me what I am about to tell you."

And when I said this, I wasn't sure how to begin. I kept stumbling over myself
awkwardly, and of course, Evan was just walking there with me, and eventually I
got to the point where I was talking about psychology.

So I went over the oedipus complex, and I attempted to stress that the entire
thing was a hypothetical exercise, but it was pretty clear as I was going
through it that it pretty directly applied to him, and to me, and to the entire
situation.

So as we kept walking, I made it clear that this wasn't an intervention, and I
think the biggest point that was made as we approached the halfway point of the
conversation was that this wasn't something that should be thought of as a "big
event" but instead is simply the progression of his next steps as a human
being.

As we approached the end of the walk, I started to recognize that I was
belaboring a particular point, and that point was that, the next steps of your
psychological progression won't just happen, like the ones before it have. This
one is crucial. It's the hero which takes goes out and takes his indepenence.
It doesn't make sense to have you independence given to you, because what
independece can it be if it is already dependent upon the person that gave it
to you?

I think that's about it as far as Evan is concerned.

I am currently listen to Alan Watts. Let me link it.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AD8_3PXXcME](The World as Self)

So something that sparked something that I want to talk about, is this.

There was once a buddhist guru. He was giving a lecture once, and he said, "All
of you are alike. You are all made of the same essence. All things are made of
this essence."

One of the skeptics there got up, hawked a large lugey, and spit it into the
eye of the guru, saying, "And is that part of the same essence? Is my saliva
part of this same oneness?"

After calmly wiping the spit out of his eye, the guru replied, saying, "Sir, do
you have a name?"

The man was silent, wary to answer, sure that this was some sort of
psychological trap.

When the man did not answer, the guru address the crowd, and said, "Raise you
hand if you call yourself John."

A few people in the audience raised their hands.

"Now raise your hand if you call yourself Steven"

The John's lowered their hands, and the Steven's raised theirs.

"So it seems," the guru continued, "We are different in that some would call
themselves Steven, and others would call themselves John. So I suppose you must
be correct. We are different."

The man sat down, incredulous that the guru just changed his mind. Was it
really this easy to change the mind of a guru. How pathetic.

But the guru spoke again. "Now," he bellowed, "raise your hand if you call
yourself I"

Everyone except the man in the chair raised their hand.

The guru laughed.

"Oh, so all of us call ourselves I except for you! How exceptional you must be!
We must examine you, because if you, of all people, are the only one here that
does not call themselves 'I', then you must surely be worth studying."

The man flushed. He considered for a moment raising his hand as an indication
of defeat, but chose to remain resolute. It would be much too embarrasing for
him to raise his hand now.

"The thing in everyone that we call 'I'. That 'I' is in me. That 'I' is in you.
We can suppose that 'my I' and 'your I' are different, seperate, disconected
'I's', or we could suppose that you and I are simply just two different aspects
of the same thing.

"Just how, to examine a statue, you must view it from every angle to truly
appreciate it's structure and elegance, to appreciate the universe, you
must be able to empathize with everyone, and see the statue that is the
universe from as many psychological angles as you can find yourself taking.

"Empathy with all things, is the key to enlightenment.

"First, find empathy with yourself

"Next, find empathy with your friends.

"On this bedrock, find the method to empathize with your enemies.

"And finally, when empathy is found with the universe, you will then notice
that the sense of self disappears, and the only thing that is left is what is.
'I' no longer exists, and the only thing that is left to fill its place, is
'Everything'."
