So I am in a position right now, a position that I have been in many times over
the past few months, where I feel like I want to write something, but I have
nothing in particular that I want to write about, nor do I have anything that I
really wish to say, other than the fact that I have this impulsion to write
something.

It's as if there are things that are going on in my brain, and these things
feel in some way important, or worth getting out, but that writing about
something will not accurately protray what those things are, and in fact maybe
even that writing is not the right medium for getting out these thoughts.

And it's interesting, because I feel that, in writing, many times like this
where my free form style just allows me to say whatever is on my mind, allows
me to eventually get to a ponit where what is on the page is something like
what is in my mind. But at the same time, I think it's interesting because what
is on the page is never usually what is in my mind that I feel like must "get
out" of my mind, as I put it earlier.

So it's something of a conundrum. ON the one hand, I want to write, because I
feel like there is something is my mind that needs to be said, but on the other
hand, I feel like I don't want to write, because what ends up being said when I
do write is not what was in my head to begin with anyway, and that there is
something that is still there that writing merely irritated or exastebated.

Perhaps it might be best to describe what it is that this feeling of something
being in my head looks like.

So if I try best to describe it, the only way to describe it is as something
like a ball that is made out of pure light. When viewed from afar, this ball is
made out of light, and it has something of a glow. Just looking at this ball is
something that is profoundly beautiful to me, and in the dreams where this ball
has appeared, when it does, I am so taken aback from it that when I wake, I
have to spend some time just gathering myself and bringing myself back to
reality with where I am and what I need to do.

When I see this ball from afar, it can start to become irritated. I know it
sounds strange to say that a ball is irritated, but it becomes so overwhelming,
the mere fact of it's existance, that it starts to impose itself on my day to
day living. It is this sense of irritation that is what I describe as "the
compulsion to write" although in other contexts of my life, it's not always
neccisarily writing, but will generally compell itself towards some sort of
intellectual endeavor, whatever it may be that it must project itself towards
at that time.

So when this ball does this, it begins to expand. If it is allowed to expand,
it grows to a point of overwhelming irritation. If it is left unattended, it
will drive me crazy, insane, and the act of quelling this ball becomes the
forefront of all thought.

But the thing is, it's not always clear what the correct course of action is
required in order to quell the ball. It has something of a mind of it's own.
Depending on what it is that I have an attachment to at that point in my life,
it will generally be towards something of that nature.

So when this ball begins to expand, the only way to quell it is by focusing on
various areas of the ball. It is like the ball is requiring me to expend some
sort of energy in some way in order to satisfy whatever it is that this ball
requires.

It is very difficult to describe exactly what form the ball takes, but it is
easist to describe it's form when the reason for it's expansion and irritation
has to do with intellectual pursuits. When this is the case, I am able to bring
my psyche, and I am able to perform something of a surgery on the ball. When
there is some problem of mathematics, or physics, or computer science, or
something similar, I can bring "myself" into the ball, and I am able to
investigate what is going on in the ball. When it is exploding in this way, it
means that there is something I am not understanding, or still attempting to
understand. I am able to investigate what it is that I don't understand.

The first step is to take the context of a problem, and to identify first how
it is that I currently think about the problem. The ball will expand, and I can
think through exactly the image that I see. But more than that, I am able to
sculpt how the ball should look, according to the problem. So when there is a
problem of physics, and I am struggling to understand how the ball sees the
problem in physics, I must first identify all of the moving pieces of the
physical problem, and determine in what way they all exist. This is generally
the hardest part of a problem.

However, at this point it's not done. Once all of the parameters have been laid
out, I must then perform a surgery on the ball. I must take all of these
parameters, and place them in something of a space. In this space, I have
contracted rules and behaviors of all the objects involved. I become something
like a god of this section of the world of the ball, and I sculpt and mold
things, and I examine how they must act. In thinking through things in this
way, I am able to excise a model of the problem that I am having, and I am able
to create something of a framework with which I can base my thoughts around
problems of this variety.

At this point in the process, the thing is no longer a ball. I am inside the
ball, and all around me are all of the components of the ball. I become lost
inside of the ball, the ball becomes my very essence, and I exist inside of the
ball. There is nothing but the ball, and the working pieces of the ball, and I
am simply an architect, examining with great scrutinity exactly where these new
found picese and parameters fit inside of this ball. I take great care in
placing everything in it's proper order, because if I simply place something,
and I don't take care, two things will happen. First, it might be the case that
the piece is place incorrectly, and when that happens, the model may fail. But
more than that, if I do not take great care in placing the models, and in
coming up with the best way to place the piece, the ball will not be satisfied.
It will stay enlarged, and it's appetite will not be filled. It must be placed,
and the exact reason for the placement of everything must be well understood.
Or at least, it must be understood well enough to satisfy the ball, and the
ball is not easily satisfied. And if the ball is not satisfied, then the work
is for naught. So great time, and great energy, and great effort must be taken
in justifying every step of the architechural journey.

Through this entire process, the ball remains large, and the ball does not
shrink until it is satisfied.

But there is another way to quell the size of the ball. This is through
addiction.

It takes great energy to quell the ball. It is large, and it require great
things. Those things that satisfy addiction will also satisfy the ball. When
the ball becomes large, it becomes difficult to know in what ways it becomes
large. It becomes large, and it might be the case that I have attempted to
construct inside of the ball, but all towards naught. Perhaps I have
investigated the swelling, and I cannot find the cause. Or perhaps I have found
the cause, but I don't have the mental or physical capacity to attend to it. Or
perhaps, even further, I do have the mental or physical capacity, but I am
being torn apart by the circumstances of reality from fully satisfying the
ball, and I must find other ways to supress the ball.

It is through addiction that the ball may be supressed. Youtube supresses the
ball. Reddit supresses the ball. Video games supress the ball.

Still, the ball is hungry. It has a taste for what it wants. Doing these things
only placates the ball in the moment. The ball will consume and devour these
things, and when it is done chewing, it will still be just as hungry as before.
So at this point, there are two options. The first is to attend to the ball,
but if such attending was not going to happen in the first place, it is not
likely to happen in this case as well. So it must continue to be fed. It will
be fed with more reddit, or more youtube, or in continued application of games.
The ball must be kept busy chewing.

But the chewing does not satisfy the ball, it only keeps it busy from becoming
overwhelming. And, on top of that, it takes much less mental energy than the
contrary. And so it feeds into itself. The psyche becomes dull, because it is
feeding the ball useless garbage instead of sharpening itself, and the ball
becomes continually irritated.

That is how I feel right now. Right now, my ball is growing, and I don't know
how to fix it, so I continually feed it things, even though I know that's not
what it wants, just so that it doesn't become overwhelming. Perhaps I should
meditate on the ball.
