So with this I want to try something a little bit different. I want to use this
section to very briefly go over the events of the past day and night, then talk
about the present, and then talk about what I plan to do for the day.

Yesterday I woke up late. Quite late actually. I am not sure exactly how late,
but we will say it was around eleven to noon. I had a dream that previous night
which I wrote out, and I finished the paper work I needed to see Richard
Edwards. I planned t oleave around three to see him, but ended up leaving at
around three twenty, and as such was a little bit late. The conversation was
okay, although I would say that I'm not sure if counseling is really something
that is for me. I gave him a bit of my background, and he did a pretty good job
at inturrupting my stream of consciousness in a way to promote that Cognitive
behavior disruption, but at the same time I'm not sure if counselling is
something that makes sense for me long term.

After that, I drove through traffic for about an hour to a Lake in Grapvine. I
forget the name of the lake. I spent a good forty five minutes from the time of
six to seven first meditating at the lake, and then I deceded that I would be
so bold as to disrobe and swim naked in the lake. I did that for about five
minutes before my fear of the unkonwn in that lake got to me, and I returned to
shore. I then dressed myself to meet Velveth and join here in her pyramid
scheme.

I got some good rops in advertising myself to people at the event. Amway was
the name of the MLM company, and it was pretty clear as the presentation went
on that it was a pyramid scheme. Everyone was laughing at this mans story,
which if it were true in the way I think it is was no real laughing matter, but
I digress. During the presentation many couples and individuals were cycled
through the stage to give their accound of just how much money they were making
through the pyramid scheme. I told Velveth afterward that I was not interested
in her sponsering mer in any way shape or form, and made my way out.

After that, I returned home. I got a little befuddled with the maps on getting
to 635, but I decided to just role with it and played the intersteller
soundtrack on the way back. It was quite profound how rattled I was from that
meeting. When I got to my parents home, I entered and attemepted to sleep. I
was not able to sleep very well. I made a mistake of eating some cereal, which
I think is simply a bad idea, and something I won't do again. I spent some time
writing in my journal, and eventually I found my way to sleep at four am.

I woke up today at 8:30 approx and actually stood up at 9:15. I went on a walk,
and then did three rounds of WHM meditaiton. Afterward, I got in the shower. At
the present moment, I feel surprisingly alert and ready to take on the day.

I plan to, after this writing, make my way straight to BJJ. After that, I plan
to wash my car at the self-service carwash there, and then I will stop by
Christenson Brothers to use their coupon to get an oil change. I will grab my
journal and perhaps write it in during the downtime then.

After that I will come back home, and I will plan to spend around twenty ish
minutes doing some investigation on Handshake and Linkedin networking. After
that, I will probably grab some food, and then I will plan to spend some time
on the Abacus project doing some free writing. From there, I will go for a jog,
shower, and then eat some dinner. After all of that, I will plan to read some
and see how I feel from there.

I am not sure if this is benefical or not, but it certainly can't help to have
some idea of how the day will go. There it is. I like it.
