So right now I have been playing around with the idea of representing my
stories with alchemical symbols. If each character is represented by a symbol,
and that symbol represents something that can interact with other symbols and
events, and as a result transform into something else, well, I think that would
be really cool.

The thing about it is, it is really hard to come up with symbols for all of
these things.

I have been reading about the idea of the heroes journey, and I think that the
people that the hero meets along the way represent the different symbols that
the hero can undergo, and likewise, the various things that happen in the story
could also represent symbols.

So, for instance, if we imagine the most clockwork version of Campbell's hero's
journey clock, and we say that we choose a version where every hour is
represented by an alchemical symbol (such as the zodiac), then theory would be
that the result of the heroes journey would be to establish the hero (which
would start as one symbol) and then show that, by the hero reacting with the
symbols of the story, as well as the other characters, will lead the hero to
transfrom from one symbol in to another over the course of the work.

In order to flesh out this analogy a little further, we could make requirements
and rules for what sorts of compounds react with what, and what sorts of
symbols represent what aspects of the process, and so forth. However, I don't
want to get to caught up in trying to make this analogy to chemistry or alchemy
actually work. Instead, I just want to emphasize the idea that the character is
going through multiple processes, and the proccess that they go through could
be thought of as an alchemical reaction along a supposed hero's journey.

So, having said all of that, I do want to come up with some sort of frame work
for describing these symbols.

So, firstly, I think the wisest thing to do would be to talk about some of the
archetypes of people that can show up.

So first is the archetype of the hero. Obviously we are going to need symbolism
to represent the different stages of our hero, since that is the whole point.
So I think it is most fitting to use the symbol of the "circle" to represent
the hero.

I think this works well for a few reasons. Firstly, the circle is probably one
of the most neutral shapes that can exist in the world, so it makes since that
the hero (the character that we want to go from a state of potential to one of
flourishing) would be represented by that which is most neutral. In some sense,
the circle represents the blank slate, on which all of the other characters and
events can make their impression.

I also like the circle, because what is considered the highest alchemical
substance, gold, is symbolized by a circle with a dot inside of it (, and that
is also what the end result of our hero could be in a certain kind of journey.

So, the next to things to talk about are the ways to represent the archetypes
in the story.

So the first archetypes to talk about I would say are the set and setting. The
earth, or the backdrop, of the story. And the dual of that archetype would be
the air, or the things in the foreground, of the story.

Both of these archetypes have more to do with the setting than they are a
character. These two archetypes are something like "mother nature" and "father
society". All stories have these two archetypes present, even if they play a
minor or insignificant role.

For instance, the three little pigs are set in a land where there are at least
three house (earth) and where the fact that wolves run around trying to blow
pigs houses down is, if not the norm, at least something that happens (air).

In starwars, we are set "a long time ago in a galaxy far far away" but more
than that, we are set in a universe where there is an energy which permeates
everything and which the characters can interact with.

In fact, it's for this reason that one can see the need for such a symbol. The
symbol for earth could be used to represent the force in Star Wars, and the
symbol for air could represent the struggle between the galactic empire and the
rebel alliance.

In general, I would say that the feminine form (although nothing about this is
particularly feminine, it is just nice terminology) would represent that which
is in the world (the earth) and the masculine form would represent that which
governs the world (the air that everyone breathes... I know it's a stretch, but
I want to make it work).

So the next two archetypes I would say are two of the most overarching and the
most obvious archetypes to talk about. They would be the Masculine and the
Feminine (just generally speaking). In alchemy, this would be corresponding to
water and fire. Water is shown with an upside down arrow, and fire and shown
with an upward facing arrow. Water is considered a feminine archetype, and fire
is considered masculine.

So the two symbols for water and fire can represent the main male and female
aspects in the story.

At this point, we can already start to combine some symbols. For instance, I
think the anima and the animus should be represented by the male or female
symbol overlayed on to the self symbol. This would be something like a triangle
with a circle intersecting it.

So the thing that I am getting all worked up about, I suppose, is that I am
just making up these symbols, and that I'm not really learning anything or
doing anything.

But I think the point is that everything is labeled, and that all the things
that are labeled have relationships to everything else that is labeled. And
also, the point is, when everything is labeled with an alchemical symbol like
this, it shows the transformation of the hero (and other characters) as they
transform.

So for instance, before Neo sees the Oracle in the first Matrix film, but after
he wakes up in the real world, we could say that he is in one alchemical state.
But, when the Oracle and Neo interact in a dialogue, Neo begins a process of
transformation, which prepares him for his encounter with Agent Smith.

And I think this illustrates the whole point of this exercise in the first
place. We could say that if Smith and Neo were to interact in an event, but it
was the version of Neo that existed before Neo talked with the Oracle, that the
result of that reaction would be different (Neo might lose, for instance, or
Trinity might die) than the reaction between the Oracly-Enlightened Neo and
Smith.

So, again, I think it is not crucial to think of the alchemical symbols as
something binding. That is, while it will certainly be the case that across
many stories, there will be similarities in the instincts when it comes to
labeling certain characters in certain ways, it is by no means neccesary to
create a "super story" which encapsulates every story, and which every story
could draw analogy to. As appealing as a sort of super story is, the problem
with it is that there are many stories that could be considered super stories,
and not only do they all have differences amosngst eachother, but also there is
no reason to choose any one of them over any of the others.

So, instead of continuing to mark out some common labels for alchemical
symbols, let us instead start to work out how to go about analyzing a work of
fiction to draw out these symbols.

So in analyzing a work, the first thing to do is to lay out all of the proper
everything. Where does everything take place? Who does everything take place
too? What takes place?

For instance, in the Hobbit, we have Bilbo and Gandalf and all the dwarves, we
start in the Shire, but we go through the Mirkwoods, and Blue Mountains, and
end up at the mountain of the dragon, and we have a series of events (Bilbo's
call to adventure, the beginning of the journey, discovery of the ring, running
from orcs on the road) by which to analyze these things.

So, at this point, I must remind everyone that what we are doing is simply
labeling things. We are not so concerned with whether or not anything is
strucurally sound or anything. We are just identifying the elements of the
story, and placing labels on them. It is similar to analyzing a piece of music.
When analyzing music, you simply idenify chords and rythyms, and also patterns
and motifs. However, when analyzing, we are not so concerned with making sure
that chords resolve, nor are we concerned with things like structural
similarity or coherence; instead, we are merely concerned with labeling all of
the chord progessions, and picking out the main motifs of the work.

So, after we have identified the elements of the work, we then would like to
identify the chemical processes which take place. This is almost always found
by laying out the symbols of events, and creating equations that include the
characters.

So, now that we have written out all of the reactants for our equations, we
need to resolve the equations to see how well it fits.

So, for instance, we might have something like "Neo and the source discess
their fate" at the end of the Matrix Reloaded. So, obviously, the reactants
here are Neo, the Source, and the event of their dialogue.

There are two ways that we can resolve this chemical reaction. The first is by
asking ourselves what we think the result of the reaction should be.

That seems strange to think about, but we must remember that the characters are
transforming when these reactions take place. So the result of the
transformation will be some new reactants that can go in to the next event.

To give the example here, in this case, we could say that the source isn't
changed dramatically by the encounter, and changes only in that he is surprised
at Neo's choice at the end. Neo, however, having learned a great deal from the
source about who he is and what it means for him to be called "the one", most
certainly transforms into a new compound at this point.

Also, I want to make a note here about the event. For most events (this one
included) the result of the event is something like a universal solvent.
Something like salt. That is, whatever is in the event doesn't usually come out
as a reactant, it is usually incorperated in to the characters that took place
in the event, and whatever unique structure that event had is now captured in
the newly transformed symbols of the characters.

However, in some cases, the event might not be totally resolved, and in that
sort of case, we must include some product that is like the event, that can be
used at a later reaction.

For instance, I am imagining a fight between two characters. Maybe there is a
boy, our hero, who is weak, and he gets in a fight with a bully. One day, the
bully picks a fight with the kid, who doesn't want to fight, but it gets
started anyway. Before the bully pulverizes the kid, the teacher breaks the
fight up. As they are being broken up, the bully pounds his fist in to his hand
while making eye contact with the kid.

So this could be one alchemical reaction in a story. The elements are... the
schoolyard, the boy, the bully, the teacher, and the fight between the boy and
the bully. The result of the reaction here (if this is how it goes in the
story) is the boy has been beat up, the bully has heightened motivation to
pound the boy, the schoolyard and the teacher remain mostly unchanged
(although, depending on what sort of form and scope the story treats the
teacher with, this might represent to her a transformation as well), but the
event, of the bully fighting the boy, does not simply transform into the
universal solvent, but instead transforms into another event, an event that is
similar to this one, but due to the placement of the reactants isn't ready to
begin.

The whole point of this discussion is to shed light on the fact that, even
though we usually think about things like people and events as seperate things,
in this sort of framework, they are both alchemical symbols that go through a
reaction, and get transfromed to other symbols as a result. The symbols that
come out of the reaction can be said to have a resemblance to those that go in,
but it does not have to be the case at all that the product must have a one to
one correlation with the reactants.

For instance, tearing down the wall in Berlin could be thought of as an
alchemical reaction between North and South Germany, the tearing of the wall,
with the result being a unified germany and some solvent.

So in this sense, "Germany" and "North and South Germany" could have some sort
of relationship, but it's not one to one. THat's my whole point. AT this point
in the analysis, we are only concerned with writing it all out, we are not
concerned with whether or not it's "true" or not.

For instance, I could write a story where a three year old boy is playing with
their toys. After some time, he sees a new toy on the tv, so he goes up to his
mother, climbs on her leg, and pleads with her while holding on to her. The
mother at first does not give in, but this only agrivates the boy crying. When
the boy doesn't get what he wants, the three year old goes in to the gun
cabinet of his father's closet, opens up the safe with the triply encoded
password, and blows his brains out.

So, in this story, we have two characters, a small number of events, and one
location. It takes place in a house, and not much changes about the house.
Then, there is the boy and his mother. We could also include the gun and the
toys as alchemical symbols if we wanted, but it's not neccesary for this story.

So to break up the events, lets just jot out the sequence of things that
happened. First, the boy is playing with his toys (1) he sees a new toy on the
tv (2) he begs his mother for it (3) then he opens his fathers gun safe and
blows his brains out (4).

So, obviously, there is some transformation that is happening during some
events. So, first the boy is in a state of normalcy. When the reaction of the
new toy and the tv happens, the boy goes to a new alchemical state of desire
and lust. After interacting with his mother, the boy transforms into a state of
denial and anger, and finally, after he shoots himself, the boy transforms to
the state of death (another universal solvent).

So, now we have to ask ourselves, is the the proper analysis of the work. The
answer to that is "as good as any other", at least in my estimation. But
something still seems off here.

The thing that is off, of course, is the final event. The boy kills himself
with the gun that was locked in his fathers safe.

So now, it seems obvious that this step in the story is where the story seems
to take an unwelcome turn, but it's not entirely obvious why our analysis fails
to catch it.

Well, again, analysis doesn't tell you what is unwelcome, it only puts together
some alchemical reactions.

So, let's look at the alchemical reaction that we put together. Our reactants
are

A three year old boy who wants a toy, and couldn't beg his mother for one.
A locked safe with a gun in it.

Now, our reaction (the boy openning the safe and killing himself) is the point
where we are a little suspect. Perhaps there is something in this equation that
doesn't "add up" so to speak.

So, the best way to "figure out" the reaction to something is to let the
reaction take place in your minds eye. Based upon the thinkers own past
experiences, he should be able to isolate that one reaction, and meditate on
what would happen if all of those reactants are placed in that situation.

It is at this point that we would like to have some sort of structured
framework for talking about what makes an alchemical reaction such as this
balanced or not.

When talking of chemical reactions, an equation is only balanced when one side
has the same number of moles of a substance as the other. What is the
alchemical equivelent of the mole that we would like to use to balance
alchemical equations?

That's actually where the analogy breaks down. There is nothing that could be
considered the "mole" of alchemical equations, at least, not in the way that we
have talked about them. This is where the "soft" in "soft science" comes in.

However, just because we can't really quantify things doesn't mean that we
can't at least gain some level of intuition about them.

So, in this case, what sort of intution should we have about alchemical
equations?

Well, the first thing is that the product of the equation needs to be possible
within the world of the universe. So, for instance, if we have established that
a certain kind of alchemical reaction can't happen in our universe (the mutant
alien's can't swim) and we put in a reaction where the mutant alien's swim
across an ocean to attack the capital city, then we have obviously violated the
"rules of alchemical processes".

That's the first and most obvious example, and that example is called a plot
hole. A plot hole is when there is one alchemical equation which produces one
result for one reaction, and an incongruent or implausible one for another
reaction. Such plot holes can exist in a well written novel, but if they do,
there must be very good reason for them.

Another way that we can judge the product of an equation is in what sort of
reaction we have to it. For instance, maybe we want to ask whether or not our
boy from earlier is ready to confront the bully again. Maybe another product of
the bully and the kid was a reaction where the kid tells his parents, and his
parents enroll the boy in karate classes. So now, the kid is reacting with the
karate classes, but has only been doing so for a week now. However, in spite of
this, the boy has gained enough confidence to confront the bully, and this
time, in spite of all odds, he wins.

So, let's talk about what's going on alchemically here. So, similar to past
examples, we have the boy going through the events, transforming at each stage
as he does. Our question is, how "valid" is our reaction at the end of the
story? All of the reactions before than have been pretty straightforward and
don't seem in any way out of the ordinary (I wrote them to be that way), but at
this last step we have to take pause.

After only one week of karate, our boy was able to fight the bully that beat
him handily before and win? That's our first objection.

We might then argue, though, that maybe all the boy needed was to find the
confidence within himself to unleash his inner passion, and when he does that,
he's able to win the fight with ease. We could argue this.

At the same time, though, as much as we want to believe that inner confidence
is all that's needed to transfrom a person, it still seems a little to
suspicious.

So, in this way, we can see that there is something missing from our equations.
We can come up with alchemical elements which we could add (or even take away)
from the reactants, and when we do that, we can come up with a more plausible
version of this reaction. In other words, while the reaction is not simply
contradictory like our plot-holes were, there is still something that feels
like it is missing from the alchemical reaction.

For instance, if our boy had trained extensively in boot camp for six weeks
after being bullied, that would create a much more balanced alchemical equation
for our final event. In other words, it becomes much more believable that our
boot-camp hardened child is able to best the bully when he goes through six
weeks of intense training rather than just a few introductory classes. Both of
those things would have made this alchemical reaction more strong (in the sense
that it would have resonated more deeply with the reader).

However, by adding these elements, we have introduced more complexity. We now
have to add in a new alchemical symbol which is boot camp, but now we have a
lot of questions about the boot camp symbol. There are simple questions (Who
teaches boot camp? Why are eight year olds going to boot camps? What world is
this where an eight year old can take off school for six weeks straight? Is
this the kind of boy that can really make it through intense boot camp?) and
then there are more meta questions (Is bootcamp the thing we want to focus on
in our novel? Do I really want my child to go through something like boot camp
in my story? Should I go into detail about the training he gets?).

All of these things also effect the alchemical strength of a reaction. So, for
instance, we made our "boy rematches against the bully" reaction more
believable and more compelling, but now, depending on how we write them, we
might have this whole reaction between boot camp and the boy which is totally
weak, and is clearly only there to service the plot. When something like this
happens, even though the alchemical reaction at the end is stronger, it's
offset by a series of weaker reactions which must take place in order for the
last one to happen. So, even though out story now is written in a way where
that particular reaction at the end is more structurally sound, we have gained
that structural security at the cost of more questionable reactions.

The last way that we can look through our analysis and attempt to balance some
alchemical equations is in looking at the whole chain of the equations.

The first thing to look at is to see how well the reactants of one equations
match the products of those which preceded it. Of course, in a perfectly sound
work, the products of each reaction flow in to be the reactants of the next,
but it's rare that this will happen. When it doesn't happen at all, characters
are labeled as "flat" and when it happens too much, characters are said to act
"out of character." So the exact manner in which one reaction flows in to the
next is another way to tweak the alchemical structure of a work of fiction.

So, to give an example, suppose I have some events that I know I want to happen
in my novel. I want my hero to discover that he has powers, I want him to use
those powers to fight villians, and I want a big showdown between the big baddy
at the end and our hero.

So, as I am writing this, I get to a point where the hero is about to face the
bad guy. But going in to it, I feel as though the hero which is entering the
battle isn't the hero that I want to enter the battle. I might get this
suspician as I am writing the action scene that perhaps the hero shouldn't win
yet.

Since I have the whole outline in my head though, I can finish this scene as if
the hero is ready to fight.

Then, when I have the whole work put together, I can see what I thought the
hero was missing in the action scene, and why I thought it was missing.
Perhaps, even though he had extensive training with the guru, he never had an
inciting passion which fueled his desire to fight back against all odds, so now
it seems like the hero is overly passionate or sacrifical for realtively little
reward or for little motivation.

Once the writer sees what is going on, they need to change something. They
either need to write in a scene which transforms the hero into what he needs to
be for that final showdown, or other reactions need to be re-written to have
slightly different product, so that the reactants going in to the final
showdown scene match more congruently with what happens in that scene.

That about covers it for everything that I want to talk about for alchimical
reactions for now. I am going to leave work and head back to my apartment.
