Okay, so the other day, I think two days ago, I went on this whole rant about
communion. Basically, the premise of the talk is  that the wafer you are eating
is most likely not the actual blood of Christ, and I went further to say that
if you really think you are, even in the most unlikely of scenarios, it's still
probably the case that this isn't in any way related to the actual body of
Christ. The point is, the wheat farms where they make their wafers, and the
wal-mart that they buy their franzia at, does not have any sort of bearing on
whether or not the bread you eat has the body of christ in it. If there was the
body of Christ in the wafers, then there would be the body of Christ in the
other things also, like sandwichs, and salami, and kale, and many other sorts
of vegatation that we eat every day. There is nothing more or less special
about that piece of bread before the pope blesses it, and after the pope
blesses it. It's still the same wheat, and the same franzia box wine, the only
difference is that an old man is waving his hands over it and handing it to
you.

So with that out of the way, I do want to go on about the thing about the thing
that I wanted to talk about today. So what I wanted to talk about was this
thing with the fucking, whatever it is, I don't remember what the words I want
to be typing are, but I have a feeling that they will come to me if I let
myself get into a free writing zone where I just go and go and I don't stop to
think about mistakes or anything like that, and when I do that, it will be the
case that something has to happen that makes it so that I am able to type just
seamlessly with whatever words I want to say. The thing about writing is that
it forces you to take your thooughts, and get them to a point where you have
them memorized. That's the thing about writing. Writing is more the act of
having a story memorized, and then just writing out the memory of the story as
you sit at a keyboard.

So I know wish to go to the point of this article where I actually start
writing something about the thing I wanted to write. I suppose the first thing
I want to write about is the scenario that I brought forth in support of my
argument that the body and blood of Christ are not in those wafers. And I want
to make one thing very clear at the outset. This is not what I believe about
how history happened. I am sure it happened a different way, and although I
know a couple of key points about what happened along the way, I am just simply
not well versed in history to make any sort of actual historical claims about
jesus, or of the people that followed him. But I have put forth a version of
reality, which leads to what we have today, and predicts what may happen in the
future, in the scenario where Jesus was an actual genitic freak of nature.

So to set the scene, you should imagine yourself as a farmer in the 5th century
of the reign of the roman empire. That's how you keep your time, as the number
of years since rome was founded. You have heard stories about things like
Romulus and Remus, and there is a person named Virgil who is preparing a story
about Aeneas and his conquering of Rome, but these stories are like the George
Washington story to you. Did George Washington actually have an apple tree, and
cut it, and then say something which spoke to his moral virtue? Or however that
story goes. I don't think so. And neither did Aeneas eat Pizza when he landed
on the shores of Italy. But Virgil wrote it, so the fictional Aeneas did.
However, you know it's a story, because the Aeneas you know was just a
mythological figure in greek mythos.

Still, perhaps you are concerned about the changing of religions. At this
point, it's been well understood that the gods like "Poseidon" and "Zeus" are
more figures of speech. People would say "Et Jupitor" which would be something
like saying "Oh My God" when they were take aback by something, but for the
most part it's been well understood that the gods of Greece, and the Gods of
Rome, are merely that, just gods, and nothing more. In fact, because they are
gods, we are able to just combine them up into one pantheon. Sure, there are
differences, like Aphrodiaty is a bit more promiscuous than Venus, but it's
pretty clear that both of them represent the same sort of psychic essence, so
they take a similar position in both mythologies.

So this sort of revalation has occured. Most people stick to their farming.
Some concern themselves with the sacrificing rituals of the old greek days, but
most as an excuse to party and feast. Because after all, what fun is a
bountiful harvest if you aren't allowed to sacrifice it to the gods of liquor
and good time. But still, you understand that a Dionysious isn't going to walk
through anyones door, and Venus isn't going to charm your husband away from
you. These gods simply exist in mythology, and nothing else, and you, as a 5th
century after rome farmer, understand that.

So you are farming, and all of a sudden, your neighbor walks up to you. Of
course, he has a farmers latin accent, as opposed to the politicians accent,
but you've known him for some time and have gotten used to the kind of latin he
talks.

He walks up and says, "AHoy there! How do you do neighbor?"

"Ahi! Jimothy my friend, how goes it with you and your family?"

Jimothy replies in the most friendly way possible. After making the
formalities, you invite him into you shed, and offer him dinner. He, of course,
accepts, and you get to talking about things for the next 2 hours. You're
conversation ranges about everything from farm life, to the doings of the
politicians in the cities. You will talk about your relations with the debt
collectors, or the smith. I might mention something about a new plow I bought,
that Paul's friend Edor made, and that it's a really quality plow. It's the
best plow I've ever used, and I promise to bring yqu over to meet him if you're
interested in getting one. We also talk about other things. Maybe there was a
meteor in the stars last night, and while you were watching them one night, you
say it. Or maybe you'll talk about your wives, and how they are getting along.

And then your neighbor will ask you about this man that has been going around
and performing miricles. It's been a rumor about the street, but he tells you
about a man that is able to go up to any crops, just by coursing his hands
through the soil, he is able to cultivate all sorts of amazing mushrooms and
exotic plants that give you the most rejuvinating and spiritually relevent
experience of your life.

So when your friends tells you this, you say, "That's bullshit, there's not a
man who can just make crops grow by coursing his hands through the soil. But
your friend swears it's just what he heard, and maybe if this man ever comes
over to our part of town, we could see it for ourselves. At this, you reply,
"Well, if he shows it to me then I'll believe it."

And then you keep talking about more things. Like, maybe one of your favorite
sheep herding dogs died, and you gave it a proper burial. Maybe then you and
your friend walk outside to the place where you buried him and kneel by it for
a moment. Or maybe you don't. Either way, you're just making conversation in
the farms of 5th century Rome.

So you think littel of this "Man that can cure miricles" In fact, you're
probably more interesetd in the plow that your friend told you about, and you
want to go down to the smith to see if you can get your hands on one.

But some point a few years later, this man decides to visit your town. All of
the hubub around town is just curiosity about whether or not this man can do
the things that people say. In fact, gossip has gone around that maybe he can
cause the blind to see, or cause deaf people to hear. But people most say those
sorts of things tongue in cheek, with the sarcastic snicker that accompanies a
sort of scoffing at the crazy things that people say about this man.

But he is coming to visit, so you decide to meet him. He is going to be giving
a talk at the central market, so you decide to go there and see him.

When you get there, you are not surprised to see a crowd of people around him.
Everyone is curious just exactly what sorts of powers this man has.
Occasionally, when the crowds get too fierce, the man will say, "Gather round,
let me show you" and he would perform a miricle before I group of people. And
everyone would be in awe, and would break up. And then the man would say, "Oh,
that drained me of my energy, please, no more. Please leave me be. And they
would be so in awe that they would do as the man said. They would leave him
alone.

And maybe some day, your neighbor, the one that told you about this man a
couple years ago, reveals to you that this man needs a place to stay for the
night, and that he is offering his place.

So the man who performs the miricles, and your neighbor, and you, all sit
around a table, and you have a conersation. So you ask.

"So what are your powers like? What is it exactly that you can do that no one
else can."

The man replies, codially, "I dig my hands in soil, and when I do, magic
mushrooms grow in the soil."

And you ask, "Is that all?"

"Yes," the man says, "I have seen the infirmary, and they assure me that
nothing is wrong with me. I first knew I had this ability when one day, I fell
asleep outside, in the dirt, and I rested my hands on the ground, near a tree.
When I woke up, all around my hands, and spreding out for quite a while around
the tree there were mushrooms. So many mushrooms. It was the most beautiful
thing I had ever seen. And then I picked one of these mushrooms, and I ate it,
and I knew that I had to spread this to as many people as I can."

At this point you're enthralled by his story, but you would still like to see
how it works. So you ask him, "How does it work?"

And he replies, as best he is able, "I honestly don't know for sure. When I
place my hands in soil, after some time they start to feel tingly, and I can
feel as though there is something like my life essence being transfered from my
hands to the soil. The mathematicians and logicians have studied it, but they
can't make any sense out of it. The doctors also have no idea about it all,
they tell me that my heart beats at a constant rythym and therefore I am
completely normal. I wish we had the capability to understand and study what is
happening to the soil when my hands make contact with them, but we just don't."

"How long does it take for your powers to take effect?"

"Oh, it's an unconscious thing. The best I undrestand, there is a theory of
medicine called pheromone theory. It says that we are attracted on one another
becasue of invisible particles in the air that float from one organism to
another. In this theory, the doctors think that perhaps I have some special
pheremones for some reason that cause all dormant mushroom seeds to grow, and
apparently there are many more dormant mushroom spores than we ever realized
before. Of course, pheromone theory is pretty out there, so the best I can say
is that I simply don't know where my powers come from. But from the moment my
hands hit soil, within 20 minutes, the pheremones will act with the spores in
the soil, and cause mushrooms to grow. It will be another 24 hours or so from
that point that the mushrooms will begin to sprout, and after 72 hours, the
mushroom will be mature, with a full cap and everything."

At this point, Jesus does a demonstartion. The neighbor procures some soil and
places it into a vase. Jesus then, in a deep calm state of meditation, places
his hands in the soil, and leaves him there for 20 minutes. While he is doing
this, he is describing the things that he is feeling in his hands, and the
things that he feels is going on with the soil. He spends some of the time
discussing, and some more of the time massaging the soil, and moving in rythmic
patterns. After 20 minutes, he removes his hands, and tells you that mushrooms
will grow in it within 24 hours.

Sure enough, 24 hours later, there are mushrooms in the soil. Jesus thanks you
for his time there, and tells you that those mushrooms will last you for a
couple years if you spread out the dosags properly. He also shows you how you
can use the spores of teh mushrooms to produce more, so it should last you a
life time if you keep it up.

Of course, you think that maybe the dirt was rigged, or that Jesus did some
sleight of hand trick, or semthing like that. So you gather some dirt from your
own farm that you know has nothing pre-rigged in it, and you bring it to Jesus,
and you ask him to perform this for you. And this time, Jesus washes his hands,
strips down naked, and performs the act in the 20 minutes for you again. From
there, you keep watch on the soil to make sure that there is no foul play going
on. You sleep with it, and you keep tabs with your wife to make sure that the
soil is indeed not being tampered with. And sure enough, 24 hours later, the
soil is growing mushrooms.

--

Okay, so I want to do some free writing about my genetic algorithm machine. So
what this machine does, is it takes as input the organisms, and the population
data, and it spits out successive generations. So we should have a class like,
GAProcessor, which basically has methods that perform genetic algorithms on a
dataset. In order to facilitate this, we need to come up with a standardization
of a genetic algorithm in the form of intefaces, and have this class run off of
those interfaces.
