So right now I want to do some free-writing on my project.

I have not done free-writing like this in a bit for this project, so I want to
get to it now.

Right now, the last thing to hammer out is this frequency thing.

So for what I understand, what this is going to be used for is banging out
weekly or daily or whatever kind of tasks on the reg, and then forgetting about
this thing. This way, reports can be automatically generated, datasets can be
ftp'd or otherwise transferred over to anyone who might want the information,
and no one has to set their alarm clock to remember every week at 4 pm to build
and send all of those reports to everyone that might want to know that sort of
information.

So, all of this needs to be captured in my frequency picker.

As of right now, I have some relevent classes to choose from, when it comes to
which aspects of the frequency you want to talk about.

So the first thing to talk about is to talk about the actual business class
itself, in the [Shared] project, named PMFrequency. This class contains an
enumeration for things like "weekly" "daily" "manual" "off" and so forth. Then,
inside of the members of the class, there is a property for "Freq" which has
the type of this enumeration (which the full qualified name of would be
[Shared].PMFrequency.PMFrequencyType).

Then, in addition to that, there will be many other properties. These
properties will all have default values, and must be serializable to xml.

So this object reprensents the most base form of a frequency that we can get.
It's a frequency choice along with the associated information that comes along
with that choice, which might be relevant to whoever receives this frequency
object.

So then, let's now talk about the front end. (The third usage, which we won't
talk so much about, is in the PMJob class, and in the worker itself, but I
don't want to get too involved in talking about that right now)

So, at the moment, I am currently working on putting together the frontend
control which will take in, as well as output, these PMFrequency objects. It
will allow the end user to choose different aspects of the PMFrequency, and
then save those aspects for the job or jobs that they want.

So far, I have gotten to the point where every job has an associated frequency,
and each one is entirely independent of all the others.

What I want to get to is a point where each frequency is associtted with a
string in a dictionary. When the user wants to add a frequency to a job, they
can either choose from the options available to them, or they build a custom
frequency and let the system assign it to the job directly.

So in the settings file (which is pre-requisite to understanding what I am
talking about) I want there to be a dictionary from strings to PMFrequency
objects.

I want the user to be able to select from this list of strings and get out a
Frequency object which they can then apply to a job.

I also want the user to be able to build a new frequency object, be prompted
for a name, and then the user can name the thing, and then use the same
frequency for multiple jobs.

This will all be saved with the XML.

So, I feel like I have done a bunch of talking, but not a lot of squaring
things away. So let's start squaring what needs to be done, on an actionable
basis.

So I have created the base object which represents the frequency control which
will be used by the front end to manipulate frequency objects, as well as the
frequency dictionary, for the user. The first step is getting to a point where
the two functions for this control (being something like LoadFrequency and
GetFrequency) are written for at least some level of functionality beyond the
absolutely trivial.

Once that is done, I will then be at the point where I can then start reasoning
about how the UI is going to work for the names and frequency objects. Once I
have in my head how that should go, I can then start putting together pieces
for assigning frequencies to jobs.

(As an aside, I don't think I will have to alter the Jobs class. Currently, the
jobs class takes in a frequency object, and my dictionary would output a
frequency object, so that works.

When I would have to change it is if I wanted to be able to change a frequency
in the dictionary and have those changes be reflected in the jobs. That is
something that is a use case that will need to be done, and I need to figure
out a way to structure my code so that it happens.

That could just mean adding a property to the Job class.)

Then, of course, the final steps would be to make sure that the jobs fire and
work as they are intended to with the worker. From there, then, it would be
just a matter of taking all of the jobs in one of the SQL files, and importing
all of the SQL things that are relevent as classes which extend my PMJob class.
That, of course, is the absolute final step after I have the rest of this in
place.


