So I kind of wanted to say something, but I don't know what it was.

Oh, okay, so I want to talk about the things that have happened to me in the
past three days. I will give a run down first, because quite honestly at the
moment I don't feel like going too deeply into it, but I just want to go over
what happened.

So the thing that I want to say right now is, I know, in the future, when I am
remembering this, I will have a memory of rear-ending a dude, and buying a new
car the next day. But this story actually starts a few weeks back.

So I have been assigned this case that, how should we say, is absolutely awful.
A client is using us like we're their personal analysis software, and it seems
wrong. That's not what we are. And it's understandable that this sort of thing
would get through our system, but the fact that it did, is sort of mind
boggling to me. We should decline cases more.

Anyway, so there was that case, and I have been working on it for the past two
weeks, and a couple of days now. Well, I started on it Thursday, Jan 31, and
from there, I proceeded to do nothing on it for a couple of days. I literally
browsed reddit and facebook and watched videos on youtube for that time. But
come Wednesday, I had gotten the am_transfer part down. Which I should have had
done by Monday, but I didn't, because of those two days. From there, I worked
on Thursday on the mobile side, and Friday I didn't work at all again.

On Monday, I did the mobile side, and on Tuesday I did the 2.0 Stuff. It got
checked in officially Wednesday morning. So overall, the schedule of working on
this case has been Thursday, begin, Friday, attempt to understand everything,
Monday, Teusday, fuck around, Wednesday, amtransfer, Thursday, Okay, am
transfer is actually done now. Friday fuck around, Monday mobile, tuesday 2.0,
wednesday, turn it in.

So Overall it was a week and a couple of days. That night, Wednesday night,
which I haven't writte about for reason that will soon become obvious, I had a
dream. In this dream, I was sorting out a problem, and to solve the problem, I
had to set one paramenter of a five dimeniosnal vector space to a low quantity,
and then the next term was near zero, and to solve the problem at hand, I only
had to use 2 out of five dimensions, and even then, I was only using them to a
small portion. I woke up, and my plan was to go to work, and write about this
dream.

But then I rear ended the car. It seemed so surreal. Like, as soon as I rear
ended the guy, I knew what the future looked like. I was able to see myself
outside of myself, in a sense, and instead of being a person in a body that
possessed a car, I saw instead some wreckage on the road and me processing my
next moves. I recognized that my body was emmitting stress hormones, and a did
my best to stay cool, talk with the man about the situation, talk to insurance
and the cops, and then the wrecker, and get my car towed and myself at work.

That afternoon, I finished my testing, and then I got a rental car. I then went
to the lot, where my car was put in a corner and set aside as scrap. I asked
them if I could surrender the title, and they said I could, but that it would
cost me the towing fee and my title. So I went to the dmv and had them print
out a title, and I surrendered the title to the wrecker, and then I paid the
wrecker for the tow, and then I went back to my apartment. From there, I
started researching things online. At this point, I was pretty certain I wanted
a new car, but I did see some decent deals on cars.com for used cars. But
still, I was pretty certain that I wanted a fit.

So I go to sleep, and I wake up. I decide that I should check out what the bank
has to say before I start talking to dealers. So I go to chase, and go to the
link that talks about car loans. Well, as soon as I put in my phone number, I
get a call from all of these dealers. This guy from Huggins Honda notices that
I'm putting in an inquiry, and askes me to stop by.

So I go over, and long story short from this ponit, I buy a car.

Now, the interesting thing about this story, is that, when the guy was offering
me financing. He showed me four different options. But really, there were five
different "Warranty packages" and each "Option" was one removed. So I haggled
with him about the warranty, and I eventually turned down everything except for
the gps tracker that will let everyone know exactly where my car is at all
times.

And afterwards, I started thinking about this, and I made a connection to my
dream. The five options were like the five dimensions of the vector space, and
in order to solve the problem, I had to set the value of some of those
dimensions to 0. ANd the solution to the problem of the warranty was very
similar to the problem in my dream.

Now, I find this really interesting. I love how this is connected. The reason
it's connected, is not due to some supernatural intervention, nor do I think
the connection is merely a loose thread of some coincidence. Rather, the
connection is in the dream being abstract enough to allow itself to fit well in
a multitude of situations. I think, in many things that I could have
encountered in those next days after the dream, thinking about it in terms of a
vector space might have made some sense. I could make up an scenario where I
don't crash my car, and instead I go to work and begin to work on something,
where a series of five things comes up. It turns out, five things coming up as
the number of options for something is rather frequent, and my brain was trying
to tell me, in some sense of speaking about it like that, that it's generally
the case that when somethnig has five dimensions to it, you want to set some of
the dimensions to zero to simplify the problem. It then was merely the fact of
mathematical connection that something came up that had five dimensions, it was
likely, and the fact that my brain seemed to understand that the dimensions for
many of the options should be zero in a solution to the problem I think says
something about the nature of things beyond one or two dimensions.

So regardless, I just liked that little tidbit. Beyond that, there is not much
more to say. I might, if I ever read back on this, have something more to say
about the car, but I imagine that the overall concept that "I rear-end a guy
and bought a new car the next day" will be the thing that I remember the most,
so I don't feel so obligated to write about it here.
