So last night I know I had some dreams, but I didn't write them down and I have
wholly forgotten them now. I think one of them had to do with skiing, but I
don't know if I'm conflating that with a different dream I had recently.

The reason I am writting now is because I want to attempt something in Jungian
terms that is called "active imagination." I have had, as you can see from a
few entries ago, some semi-lucid, and fully lucid dreams a couple of times, but
it is generally the case, with some exception of course, but still, it is the
case that I don't usually know what my dreams mean. I like to think about the
dreams as being the most truthful form that we as humans are able to acheive of
actually touching "the realm of the spirit" but this has the disadvantage that
the interpretation of dreams is difficult at best, and has a lot of room for
willful injection of your own desires into the meanings.

I have avoided "active imagination" for the reason that it seems less pure to
me than the dream. It seems as though it is some case of just "imagining
whatever I want" and from it I could come pre-disposed to conclusions that I
would like to draw from it, and as such I could create dream material which I
could use my conscious desires to guide into whatever vision I would like.

However, I think this is merely the other side of the coin. Dreams are hard to
interpret, and imagination is difficult to guide truthfully. I think, by
attempting both of these things, I will be able to approach the center point of
the doings of my psyche from both ends, so that the failings of one method will
be overcome by the strengths of the other. So it is with that that I would like
to detail out my first "active imagination" session.

So I am not sure the best way to write these out yet, because so far I have not
written any out, but I think it would be best to describe each session as
something of an "experiment" of sorts.

So in this session, I started by imagining the "maiden of truth" as I have so
named her in the past. I arrived at this starting point because I was reading
some of "man and his symbols" just now, and I just finished the section on the
anima, so it only seemed appropiate for me to begin to talk about the most
crystallized form of the anima that I have so far conjured up.

So the first thing I thought about was her, in her cave. The image that quickly
came to my mind was of a forest, and in a sort of circular clearing of this
forest, there is something like a dome shaped cave, similar to the cave that
Jesus was buried in, but in this cave was the Crystal Maiden of truth. Around
this cave are man hooded figures, carrying crosses in their hands, and going
around.

This active imagination has a few iterations. The main thrust of this case is
my attempt to free the maiden from the cave of her rapists.

The first point of action that I attempt is to dress as one of them. I adorn
myself in robes, and carry a cross just like theirs. This form seems wrong
though, but I decide that in order to go in undetected, it must be done. I am
able to make it into the cave, and I reveal myself to the maiden. Then,
carrying a sword, I annouce that I am there to rescue her.

I link her arm in mine, and begin to pull her out of the cave. As we go out,
the Christians become aware of my actions, and begin to rise against me. The
first one that comes to me, I thrust my sword under his hip bone, through his
scrotum, up, into his belly and neck, and out through his head, and I take the
sword, and I pull it out of him long ways, so that his bloody insides are
reveald to me. In these insides I see the sign of the pentagram.

Of course, there isn't just one of them here. There are many, and they are all
after the maiden. Many have become naked, and with their erect penises, they
are attempting to get to her and rape her so that she might be taken away from
me. With my sword, I begin chopping off their penises, and kicking them away
from her. This works for some time, but is not a permanant solution. For every
penis I chop off, there are many more of the mob there to continue chasing for
her.

Eventually, I decide that this course of action has reached it's end, and I
decide to reset the "simulation". To what extent this is "allowed" in active
imagination, I do not know, but at this point I felt I had reached something of
a dead end.

So at this point, I decide to go out to a hill, in the distance, and I sit and
watch on and observe the group as they circle the mound of the maiden. The next
plan I come up with is to take their leader, and to crucify him. I think,
surely they will be drawn to a crucifiction, in fact, they would greatly enjoy
such a thing. So I find their leader, and I take him with me way out to the
side, and I begin to whip him and lash him, and hang him up on a cross, and
continue to torture him while he is up there.

This is successful in luring them away from the cave, but the problem is, the
Maiden does not know that she is free to escape, and I am too busy with my role
as torturer to come and rescue her.

I think of constructing a sort of device which goes through the whipping and
lashing motion for me, but when I construct that, and leave it be, the
Christians are not afraid of it, and tehy are able to dismantle it, and will
come back to the cave and catch me before I can save the maiden.

So the next thing to do, then, is to let the Maiden know of my plan before it
happens, so that she can be prepared to escape.

But now I run in to the problem that I have already tried a frontal approach,
and the Christians are not so keen to letting me in. There is also a problem of
logistics. In the Christian circle, when they circle the cave, they each take
turns entering the cave and raping the maiden, and I have taken my turn
already. They won't let me go in out of order, and to wait until it's my turn
again would take quite a long time, and the maiden will be getting raped all
the while as I just "wait my turn".

The next thing I think to do, again now, meditating on the hill watching over
this, is to tunnel underground, and into the crystal chamber there. This is a
good approach, and I am able to imagine a tunnel that leads into the chamber,
but the problem is, any tunnel that leads into the crystal chamber will only
get under the floor of the chamber. From there, I can look up at the alter, and
see the maiden, and in fact, from this vantage I do take a moment to take in
her beauty. But I can't alert her to anything, the chamber does not conduct
sound, and I can't "break through" to her because the chamber is made of
crystal.

So I tunnel back, and I think of a final ridiculous idea. The idea I think of
is to take all of the christians, and turn their heads around on their heads.
Then, I decide to turn all of their crosses upside down, and then, in the place
where I was before crucifying their leader, I placed a large upside down cross.

At first, I think about how stupid this idea sounds, but the more I thought
about it, the more I realized that it probably has some sort of symbolic
meaning that I don't understand at all, so I decide to give it a try.

I execute the plan, and to my amazement, the Christians, when they realize that
all of their crosses have been turned upside down, and that there is an upside
down cross in the distance, all start flocking towards that cross. This leaves
the crystal chamber open.

I run in to the chamber, and I confront the Maiden. I tell her, "I've done it!
I've figured out how to lure the Christians away from you. I can free you now!
Come with me!"

But the maiden would not come. She just merely told me that what I have done is
just a childish trick, and the Christians would come back and find her at any
point. I tell her that it's fine, I can protect her from them, that the
Christians are weak, and that none of them stand a chance against me. She
disagrees though, and says that there are too many of them, and that no matter
how much I try I will eventually get overwhelmed. At this point, I am becoming
very sad.

I tell her that we should at least attempt it. That attempting to be free is
better than living like this. She disagrees, and says that she has found some
solace in her situation. She says that she is not happy about the situation,
but that it could be much worse. She even says that she has come to enjoy the
raping, not in a pleasurable way, but in a way that she has become numb to it,
and she doesn't want to lose that numbness to it.

I then ask her if that's what she really wants, if she just wants to submit
herself to being raped like this by the Christians for all of eternity. She
just simply says "I gain solace in it, I have produced their entire
civilazation, I'm dedicated to it."

This point is not a point that I am proud of, but I am on the verge of tears,
and I'm really trying hard to figure out where my imagination is trying to take
me. I say to her, "So you want to be raped? Is that what you want? Because I
can give you that."

At this point, I grabbed her by the hips, and placed her on the alter, and
began to rape her. I only did this for a little bit before I forced myself out
of the imagination, and brought myself back to reality.

I think the biggest take away from this session is a few things about my anima.
I think the biggest thing is, she is much weaker than I thought. I had the
impression that she had a strong resolve, but she is instead very weak. I do
not know how to go about restoring some strength in her, but I think that is
all I can conjure for now.
