So last night I had a dream. This dream takes place in a certain dream version
of Seattle. While I'm there, I decide I want to see what sort of extra
cirrucular activities UW has.

So I walk in to a place in UW which is similar to the opening of the activity
center, and I ask about their pool hours. The pool is just behind the front
desk, and the lady there says that the hours are posted on the wall to the
entrance to the pool, and to be careful because non students have different
hours than students.

So I go into the foyer room, and I check the flyer there. On it, I see hours in
the morning, and I check my watch and it's something like nine o clock, and the
hours from 9-11 are for the swim team practice, and then the general public
hours are just from 11-1, and then there is extra student hours after that. I
didn't check the rest of the thing except to see those hours weren't available
to the public. So I'm dissapointed now, because I presume that the public hours
are going to be crowded as fuck, so I continue on past the pool to see what
else there is.

As I go past, I see a bunch of different areas, which resemble something like
pleasure island from Pinnochio. There is something like an outdoor area with a
bunch of pools, and in between the pools are seperated by the regular concrete
barriers, then behind these pools, there is something of an arcade area.

The most prominent thing I remember in the dream is wanting to get across the
pools to the arcade, so I walk on one of the narrow barriars seperrating the
pools, but I have to be careful, because there are people going back and forth
across the way, in a parkour like manner, and I have to avoid them.

That's honestly about all that I remember in the dream. I remember when I get
across, there is someone there, and I talk to them. Fuck me there is quite a
bit more, probably the most important part.

So when I get across, I start talking with someone about stuff, and they show
me their collection of gems. They talk about how they have been collecting this
certain variety of headband, and on these headbands, there are gems. She goes
on to show me these gems, and how each headband has a certain gem, the largest
one, which is in the center of the band, and then two more on each side, for a
total of five, which are valuble gems, and worth keeping, and then the rest,
which are small and insignificant.

The dream then cuts to them peeling off the gems that are worth keeping into a
bucket, that spirals down into a container, and doing this for multiple
headbands, so that they have a whole container of gems that are worth keeping.

I look in to the bucket, and it's very beautiful. It's another sort of scene
where I am taken aback by it's beauty.

--

So at this point I have talked a lot about how I want to write a story with the
perspective of something like an omniscient and snarky narrator. So I think I
want to try that now.

A lot of fairy tales begin with the words "Once upon a time." Because this is
something like a fairy tale, I suppose it should begin with "once upon a time"
as well, but really this story doesn't have much to do with time as much as it
has to do with place, so we are going to begin this story with the words, "Once
upon a place."

So, once upon a place, there was a member of this world. You see, many stories
have their own world, and this one does as well, and writing out the place in
words doesn't really have the impact that it would otherwise. You see, this
world is something like a consciousness. It's a hive mind of people. But the
people are angels. And the angels represent neurons and electrical movement in
the neurons. The paths that the angels take are the neurons then. But is that
really what's going on?

So what is going on is this.

The world existed before the awareness of the world did. No one knows why this
is so. It could very easily have been the other way. Awareness of existance
could have been the other way around. There could have been something that
said, "I am" and then after they said that, other things came into existance.
Perhaps that's god. But in this world there most certainly isn't a god, so I
suppose it has to be the other way around.

Something existed, then something else became aware of existance.

And when he became aware of it, the first thing he said when he saw it was,
"What the ever living fuck is this?"

Because when he looked at the world, he didn't know how to make sense of it.
Why is there air? Couldn't there just as easily be a world where there isn't
air? Why do we need to breathe? Couldn't there exist a world where breathing
wasn't neccessary? Sometimes he tried not breathing, but it didn't work for
very long, so he figured that perhaps understanding how to breathe was somehow
a requirement of the world. But why? That was always the question. Why is it
like this. And even more important, why do I care why it's like this?

But he didn't know. Instead, he was just here. He didn't know why, or for what
reason, he suddenly began to understand that he started existing, but now he is
existing, and when he is, he decides that he might as well make something of
it.

But what? If he doesn't know why he exists here at all, then for what reason
would he make something of it.

Some things feel good, so he decides to try and maximize those things that make
him feel good. But soon he learns that those things that make him feel good,
don't actually feel good in themselves, they only feel good for some other
reason.

And the strangest thing of all, is that he is the only one that he feels asks
and wonders these questions.

Why isn't everyone's waking moments just everyone questioning and wondering
what the hell is going on in the universe? Why is there a universe? Does it
makes sense for us to live in it the way we are? Or am I the only one to ask
these questions?

It doesn't make sense. Either everyone has all of these questions, and they
don't ever verbalize it, or they don't have these question, and somehow he is
the outlier.

But why would questioning the reason for existance make him an outlier? Is
curiosity so rare that he is the only one that seems to possess it?

Others seem to act in a way which does things, so perhaps he should act in a
similar way. Maybe there is something to be said for ignoring these questions
of why the universe exists, and instead simply letting yourself be a thing that
does exist in the universe. Maybe the thing to do is to just let yourself exist
in the universe, and seek to try and understand how it works and what it does.

So that's what the man does now. Instead of asking why he exists here, he
instead asks the question of how "here" works.

But it's a really hard question to answer. Mostly because, when you start to
figure out how here works, you still have to ask why it works that way. And now
you're stuck asking why again.

But the man looks around. He sees a pedastal, and at the top of the pedastal is
a man. He's in robes, and he's talking about how we are not worthy, and how all
of us are really bad at living life, but there was one man who lived life so
good that he actually defied everything that we know exists about the world.

This guy did things that shouldn't be possible. And he did it just by being the
best man that there is.

The man looks around. He wants to meet this man.

So he walks up to the person at the pulpit, and he says, "Excuse me, sir, I
would like to meet the man that you speak of? Where might I find him?"

The man at the pulpit looks confused, but smiles. "I'm sorry sir, but I would
like you to sit down please. I am in the middle of my speech, and everyone
would like to hear what I have to say."

The man is confused. He simply had a curiosity about this man that acted in a
way that allowed him to trancende what he believed to be possible. But now he
was being told to sit down? Why didn't any one else want to meet this man? Why
was everyone else just sitting and listening to this proxy?

So before the man sat, he said, "I would like to see it. Can you do anything
that this great man has done?"

And the man at the pulpit smiled, and said, "I believe you are confused. Please
sit down and let me continue my sermon."

But the man was still further confused. He turned, and spoke to the crowd. "Do
you all not want to meet this man? Do you not want to see him do these things?
Are you not confounded by how the universe works? I am greatly confused? Why do
you sit there and listen when you could get up and learn?"

But the man at the pulpit said, "That's enough, I will have to ask you to
leave."

The man was greatly confused. Why was he being told to leave? This did not make
sense to him.

But this route was not yeilding any answers to the questions he was asking. He
was told that faith in this man was the path to salvation, but salvation was
not the question he was asking. The man just wanted to know how the universe
worked, he wanted to at least know that, even if he couldn't know why it why it
existed, he at least wanted to know how it worked.

But this encounter left him even more confused. Do these people know how it
works or not? They act as if they do, but their explanations make no sense. Why
do they sit and listen to someone talk about a perfect man? Why don't they look
for this man themselves, and see what they can do? Does that man even exist, or
do they just want to talk about him?

The man was very confused.

The man then walked out of the church, and walked into the street. At the
street, he saw a hustler. The hustler walked up to him, and said, "Come with
me, I can show you the answers you want."

The man, seeing no reason to distrust the hustler, followed him into the
sewers.

The hustler then beat the man, and robbed him. He took the clothes off his
back, and he took the food out of his pack. The hustler then said, "Alas, you
now have your answers. You will now go hungry, you will starve, you will be
depraved of that which you were born with, and in that, you will find your
answers."

The man was deeply confused. Why was this man hurting him so? He could not
fight back, he did not know how. He just saw the feces and urine streaming by.

Naked, and confused, he sat there. The aroma made him vomit.

He vomited into the sewer. His vomit mixed in with the excrement. He was
entirely naked, and alone. But he was not scared. He was only confused.

Why did this man leave me here? Could we not share the food? Is this how the
universe works.

Maybe I should look for the man. The man that can defy how the universe works.
If I can find him, maybe he can change things so that this hustler does not
need to rob people and leave them naked in the sewer to survive.

The man stood up, and walked around the sewer. He did not know how to get out.

The man tried to yell for help, but he had no energy, instead, his mouth
opened, but no sound came out. He looked, but all he saw as a dark tunnel in
all directions. But with what little force he had, he walked.

He continued to walk, but it was dark, and he couldn't see where he was. His
hurger grew, and his energy sank. The man did not want to find the man anymore.
He just wanted to find any man, so that he might have food in his belly.

Eventually, he tried to walk, but he couldn't anymore. He collapsed.

He awoke in a white room. There was beeping. The room was empty. There were
tubes attached to his body.

The man did not know what this place was. Do I still exist? The man felt
sensation. He did not have hunger.

He sat up. The beeping grew shrill and frequent. A woman in blue walked in.

"No, stay back," she said. "You are in bad shape. We must heal you. You got
mugged pretty bad."

The man was confused. "What is this?"

"You are in a hospital. You're lucky that maintainence was today, or else no
one may have found you. But you're safe now. You got beat up pretty bad, and
you need healing."

The man was still confused. "Is the man that does the impossible here?"

The nurse laughed. "I'm just here to nurse you back to health. You need rest,
and care, and then you can be healthy again."

The man was confused, but grateful.

After some time, the man recovered wonderfully.

A man in a white coat came up to him. He told him about his condition.

"You have recovered greatly, you are really quite a work. You're fortunate that
you survived, and that we found you when we did."

The man then asked the doctor, "Are you the man that does the impossible? I
heard someone talk about him, and I want to meet him. I am deeply confused."

The doctor laughed. "No, my work is not impossible, I merely try and let life
grow where it can. I am sorry about your confusion, unfortunately I can't
help there. The receptionist will give you your bill."

The doctor left before the man could ask him what a bill was.

The nurse came back and, and said he was free to leave.

The man walked to the front, and the lady there said, "How would you like to
set up your payment plan?"

The man was confused. He said, "I do not know what those words mean? Could you
explain it to me?"

The receptionist looked at him oddly. "Well, we have two options. Since you
don't have insurance, we will have to set up a monthly recurring fee."

The man was confused. But he said, "Okay." The receptionist then handed him a
piece of paper, and asked the man to fill it out. It had a bunch of words the
man didn't understand, but with the help of the receptionist, he was able to
fill it out to completion.

The man then left, and he felt better. Maybe now he could resume his journey to
find the man who could do what no one else could.

This time the man found a road, and he walked on it. On the road, he saw
another man that looked like the hustler. This time he ignored him. It felt
wrong to ignore him, but he looked at the road, and continued walking.

Still, the hustler came up to him, and the hustler said, "I can bring you to
what you seek."

The man then replied, and said, "Explain it to me before you do."

The hustler was confused. He said, "No, you must have faith in me if you want
to join."

The man replied, "No, I do not have faith in you, the last time I trusted
someone like you, I was left robbed and naked and alone in a sewer. I have only
just recovered. If you can show me, then show me here, in the open where I am
safe."

The hustler then said, "No, I cannot do that, you must follow me, where I can
give you what you want."

The man said, "I'm sorry, but I must be going. I am looking for a man who can
do the impossible, and I must find him."

The hustler walked on. The man looked back, and saw the hustler talking to
another man, saying the same thing.

The man continued walking. Eventually he saw a large concrete box. Many people
were walking in to this box with empty hands, and walking out with bags full of
food. The man was becoming hungry, so he decided to walk in and see.

Inside the building there were isles, and in each isle was a different variety
of food.

The man walked to one of the isles, and grabbed a bag with bread in it. He saw
other people doing similar things.

He took the bread and began to walk out of the building with it.

As he did, a man with a vest came up to him.

"Excuse me? Are you going to pay for that."

The man looked at the bread. "Pay? What is pay?"

The man in the vest huffed. "You have to pay for it if you want to have it."

The man was confused. "How do I pay for it? Can I not just walk out and eat
it?"

The vested man pointed to a cash register. "Over there. Get in line."

The man looked over to see people holding things. There was a row of lines, and
at the end of each one, there was a person scanning the things, and putting
them in bags. This must be what paying is. The man thanked the vested man, and
walked into one of the lines.

When he reached the front, the lady scanned the bread. Numbers appeared on teh
screen in front of him. The lady then asked, "How will you be paying?"

The man was then confused. "How? I thought this was how? Didn't you just pay it
for me?" He was deeply confused.

The lady said, "No, I'm not going to pay it, are you going to use cash or
credit?"

The man said, "I don't know what those words mean."

Another person behind him in line said, "Give the lady your money, asshole, we
don't have all day."

"Money? I don't think I have any money. Do you have money that I can use to
pay for this bread?"

The man said, "You lazy cunt, get a fucking job."

The man was deeply confused. He looked back to the lady that scanned the bread.
"If you don't have any money then I'm afraid I will have to ask you to leave
the store."

Just then, an elderly woman walked up, and said, "I'll help out."

She then removed a piece of plastic from her bag, and handed it to the cashier.
The cashier played with it a little bit, and returned it to the woman.

"Thank you, have a nice day."

The man wasn't sure what just happened, so he turned to the elderly woman, and
asked, "Is this bread payed now? Is it okay if I leave the store and eat it."

The woman said, "Oh, my dear, yes, I have payed for your bread."

The man said, "Okay, thank you. I am very hungry, and this bread will feed me."

The woman said, "Oh dear, you seem lost, but I am happy to help."

The man then said, "If I could ask, do you know about the man who does the
impossible?"

The lady said, "Oh, I don't know anyone that can do the impossible."

The man said, "Oh, this man behind a pulpit told me about a man that did
impossible things. I want to meet him. I am walking on the road to try and find
him, but I don't know where to look."

The elderly woman perked up. "Oh, I understand. Yes, I do know him, come with
me, I'm on my way to see him now."

The man grew very excited. "Oh, I'm so glad you know him, I am ever so excited
to meet him. I have so many questions for him."

The woman smiled back to him.

They walked out of the store. The man followed the woman to another building.

They walked in, and the man recognized it. He said, "Oh, this is similar to the
other place where the man behind the pulpit told me about the man that does the
impossible. It's very similar in fact. But this place is empty, there are no
people sitting here and listening."

The woman said, "Yes, this is the house of the Lord, it is here that you can
meet the man which you seek."

The man was excited. "This is great, but I don't see him, where is he?"

The woman smiled. "Oh, but you see, this man is not here like you and I are
here. This man is here in your soul."

The man was confused. He had not heard of a soul before.

"In my soul? Well, where is my soul, so that I may find this man inside of it
then?"

The woman said, "Oh, no, your soul isn't a physical thing, your soul is inside
of you, it exists, it is your essence, it's what makes you alive."

The man was again confused. "I don't know what is inside of me, but I don't
think there is a man inside of there. He wouldn't fit, would he? Unless he is
really small? But I don't know about these little people, I haven't seen any."

The woman smiled again. "No, no, your soul is not like an organ. It's not like
the liver, which you can observe and touch. The soul is much deeper. You must
have faith, and you must pray, and if you let him, the Lord will reveal your
soul to you.

The man was confused again. "What is pray? How do I do that."

The woman showed him. She said, "First, you bow your head, and fold your hands,
and close your eyes. Then you say, "Lord, I am not worthy of your presence, you
are much more bentiful and bountiful than me, and you provide all that I may
take for myself. You are all powerful and all knowing. I am in your hands
Lord."

So the man closed his eyes, and folded his hands, and he repeated after the
Woman. He said all the words.

He opened his eyes and said, "Okay, now what."

The woman said, "No, you don't understand, it's not the words that matter, you
have to mean them."

But the man said, "I don't know what they mean? I'm very confused at how this
works."

And the woman smiled and said, "Oh, but you must have faith."

But the man said, "Faith? That is what the hustler told me. He told me to have
faith. But then he took me to the sewers, and raped me, and took all of the
clothes off of me, and left me naked and alone and in the dark."

But the woman said, "Oh, my dear, I'm so sorry about that. You shouldn't trust
in hustlers. Instead, you should trust in the Lord, for the Lord is good. Trust
in the Lord and he will provide."

But the man was still confused. "But how should I know to trust in the Lord but
not the hustler? Where is the Lord, and how do I trust him."

The lady said, "Oh, my dear, it's all about faith. You must have faith. You
must say the words, and truely mean them."

So the man closed his eyes again, and clasped his hands, and began the words
again, but this time he tried to understand them. He said, "Lord, I am not
worthy of your presence." But already he was confused. Why was he not worthy of
the Lord? "You are powerful and all knowing." But how did he know that? If the
Lord is powerful and all knowing, then why did he have to talk to him like
this? He was very confused.

After he finished, and looked to the woman again, and said, "I do not
understand these words. I am looking for the man which does the impossible, and
you told me you can bring me to him, but I do not understand how saying these
words and meaning them will bring me to this man.

And the lady smiled and said, "I think that is enough for today. Just continue
praying, and continue trying to understand, and eventually the Lord will work
through you."

The man thanked the woman, and they left the building.

The woman said, "I must return now, my husband is expecting me, and I have a
dinner to host. But I wish you the best on your journey to Christ"

She placed her hand on her forehead, then her sternum, followed by both her
shoulders, and bowed, then walked away.

The man looked at her with bewilderment. Why was she acting so strange? Why was
she having him make these gestures, and say these words? How did any of this
lead him to the man which he wanted to find?

He walked away from the building, with bread in his hands. This lady had given
him food, but he still wanted to find the man who could do impossible things.

He found a road again, and he walked.

He walked for many hours, and it was becoming late in the day. The sun was
setting, and the man grew tired. He found a spot in the grass which was soft,
he cleared the branches there, and he lied down to sleep.

He woke up to a bright light. The light was not like the glowing orb which he
saw the day before, but was much closer, and brighter. He looked into it, but
turned away because it hurt his eyes.

He heard a voice. "Excuse me sir, what are you doing here?"

He was dazed, and groggy. "What?" the man replied with a hoarse voice.

"What is your busisness here?"

"Business? No, I'm not doing business, I just grew tired, so I wanted to
sleep."

"Wait here."

The light turned away from him. As the mans eyes adjusted to the darkness, he
could see a light on the road away from him that was flashing red and blue. He
started to remember what he was trying to do.

He walked up to the man that woke him. "Excuse me, maybe you can help. I'm
looking for a man that can do the impossible. I would like to speak with him. I
have many questions for him. Do you know him?"

The officer turned back to the man. "SIT! REMAIN SILENT! DON'T MOVE" the
officer yelled at the man.

The man was startled. He sat, and the light continued to beat down on him.

"Who are you and why are you sleeping here?"

The man wasn't sure how to answer. "Well, I'm trying to find this man, and I
thought he might be somewhere on this road. I'm just greatly confused about why
it is I exist here, and I think that maybe this man that I have heard which
does the impossible might be able to answer my questions. Can you please turn
the light away? It hurts my eyes."

The officer returned to the box with the flashing red and blue lights. He said
some obscure numbers into a black device which rested on his shoulder, before
he turned back to the man.

"Why are you sleeping on the road? You know it's illegal to sleep on public
land, right?"

The man said, "It looked like a comfortable place to sleep. I don't know what
illegal means, but I was tired, and just found a good place to lie down so I
could rest."

The officer turned back to him. "All right, well if everything comes back
clean, I'll just give you a warning, but you should know that if I find you
here again, I'm going to have to ticket you."

The man said, "Okay," and began to walk away.

The officer stopped him. "EH, EH! Stay right here." The officer instruted the
man to remain.

The man was confused. Did the officer want him to stay here or find some other
place to sleep? He was getting mixed messages.

The man began to prepare the place he was sleeping. It was warm from his
residual body heat, and it felt nice.

Just then, the black device on the cops shoulder started speaking again. The
man could not understand it, but when it was done, the cop yelled, "Hand's on
your head! Don't move. You are under arrest for debt evasion!"

The man was confused. Why was the cop yelling? And why did he want him to put
his hands on his head? Was this like the woman who wanted him to close his eyes
and fold his hands and rehearse a pattern of words? And what was debt evasion?
The man was entirely confused.

He put his hands on his head, and the cop began to grab him. He grabbed his
arms and began putting some metal rings around them.

"This is like the hustler that took me into the sewers and beat me and raped
me!" the man thought. "That was painful, and I didn't like it. It was awful,
and I shouldn't trust people that do that. I don't want that to happen again. I
have to get away!"

The man tried to get away. He struggled against the grips of the officer, and
started running away.

He felt a jolt of energy pierce his back. Every muscle in his body felt like it
was contracting, and he could do nothing but fall to the floor, helpless to
move his own body. The officer handcuffed him, and carried him to his feet. He
was then thrust into the back of the box with the red and blue lights. The
officer slammed the door. The officer then got into the box, and it began
moving. The officer turned around and began driving the other way, opposite the
direction the man was walking.

The man was beginning to regain himself, recovering from the taser that had
jolted him. The man screamed. There were bars between him and the officer. He
kicked and screamed, and he did everything he could think to try and get out of
the moving box.

"I want out! You're going the wrong way! I've already been here. The man isn't
here!"

The man continued to scream, and the officer continued to ignore him. When
screaming becaming exhausting, the man thought, and said, "I have bread, if you
go back to where you found me, there is bread! What do you want from me? All I
have is bread and these clothes. I don't want to go this way! I just want to
find the man who does impossible things!"

The officer continued to ignore him.

Eventually the man felt the car come to a stop.

The officer got out. He looked at the man through the window. He said, "Look,
we can do this the easy way, or the hard way. Either you stop screaming and
kicking, and I take you out of the vehicle and we walk our way calmly to your
cell, or I get my boys, and all of us grab you and forcibly remove you from the
vehicle, and cause a lot of pain to you as we run. It's up to you. Which will
it be?"

The man calmed down, and said, "I would like to return on my journey to find
the man who does impossible things."

The officer smiled. "Oh, you're not going on a journey to anywhere tonight. The
more you resist, the longer we're going to hold you. Are you ready to comply?"

The man thought about his situation. The officer seemed to want to keep him
bound up for whatever reason, and he wanted to get back on his journey. He
thought about trying to run away, but he didn't want to get hit by that
shocking device again.

The man asked, "What do you want from me?"

The officer looked back. "I just want to take you to your cell."

The man wasn't sure if he should believe him. "What is my cell? What happens
there? How long do you want me to stay here?"

The officer was getting annoyed. "We just want to keep you here for some time,
we want you to know that evading debt has consequences. These are the
consequences. The more you resist, the longer you will stay here."

The man thought about it. It seemed as if there wasn't anything he could do to
get away from the officer. He didn't think he could trust him, but he couldn't
think of an alternative. He didn't have a choice.

"Are we calm now?" The officer asked.

"Yeah, I'm calm, I just don't understand what you have to gain by doing this to
me? You left my food, and you don't want my clothes."

The officer smiled. "I'm just trying to make the world a better place."

That made very little sense. How is shocking me and putting me in metal rings
making the world a better place? Nothing seemed to make sense.

Still, the man was getting exhausted, and decided that maybe doing what this
officer told him would help him get back to his journey. Maybe if he did what
the officer wanted, he could get back to trying to find the man that could do
the impossible sooner.

The officer opened the door, and grabbed the man by the handcuffs. He pulled
him out of the car by his arms, and pushed him in front of himself.

The officer led the man to a door with bars. The officer removed the handcuffs,
opened the door, and tossed the man inside.

The man turned his wrists. At least now his hands weren't tied. But the room
was small, and he wasn't sure he could get out.

In the room was another man. The man had blue eyes, a beard, and wore orange
rags.

The bearded man looked over at the man. Out of the corner of his eye, he asked,
"What are you in for?"

The man was confused. "I'm here because that blue clothed man chained my hands
behind my back and forced me in here. He told me that if I cooperate, he'll let
me out."

The bearded man laughed. "Oh, they don't let people out of here, once they put
them in. Unless you're rich, they keep us here for as long as they decide they
want to feed us.
