So last night I know I had dreams. I had multiple dreams. They were of dark
things, of demons and such. It was quite terrible. But at the same time it was
quite relaxing. As I woke up, took my shower, and began to drive my way to
work, I thought about what sorts of dreams I had, and I was quite amazed. I had
just smoked some, so I couldn't remember any of the details of the dream, but I
remembered having these uneasy feelings, like I was fighting off demons
everywhere, but they weren't harming me. They were only there, just to be
there, because they wanted to make themselves known to me. There were so many
of them, it was quite astonishing.

This dream only made sense to me as I was driving. I have many demons right now
in my psyche, and in my dreams I don't even try and supress them. They just
exist there. I am at one with them. I choose to intergrate that into my life,
and just relax in it's stead. Demons in my dreams can't hurt me, nor should
they.

Of course, I know how to defeat demons, but such work can become exhausting,
and I delgate myself only a few demons at a time to defeat incrementally. There
is no use in attempting to destroy all of the demons.

So in the dream, I coexisted with them. I was not pleasured by them, nor was a
excited to meet them. In fact, there were times in the dream I felt mighty
uncomfortable becasue of the sheer volume of demons around me. It was quite
concerning, and although I expected such a dream, it still took me by surprise
the raw quantity of it.

It's also interesting, because although I had gotten over 9 hours of sleep, I
still wanted to return to the world of the dreams and get back to experiencing
the things that my psyche had to offer me. It's as if the 9 hours of
hallucinating demons was not enough for me, and in order to truly balance my
dream life with my real life, simply existing in a state of perpetual demon
torture for another couple hours would have been appropiate.

Of course, I couldn't do that, and I rather quickly smoked the demons away as I
entered back into the waking world.

I could talk about the forms that these demons take in the real world, but I
don't know that, and I don't remember many details about what the demons were
like in the imaginary world. So instead of deliberating on that, instead I will
take the message from the dream. I feel as though I need to exist with my
demons, for the time being, and simply fight them one by one again.

I have returned to drawing mandalas. I attempted to draw one without the
marking points of the grid, and I must say it turned out decent. Mostly, I was
excited about how I was able to utilize both the sharpie and the colored pens
to their fullest advantage to create a rather colorful and intricate mandala.
It comforts me to be able to create works such as this.


