So last night I had two dreams.

The first takes place in something of a "outland" version of Barnes and Noble,
is the best way to describe it. The store is two stories, the bottom level
opens up straight from the street (which is mostly black sky and deep chasm and
such), and when you turn left into the store, and you go to the back, you find
the stairs, which take you to the second level. There is something of a balcony
on the second level (but not very much of one at all, maybe a couple feet above
the first level) and then the second level goes on for about the same amount of
floor space as the first level.

On the second level, towards the left, is the cash register. I am working a
shift at this store, and it's a long shift, that starts in the early afternoon,
and extends through evening and well into the night shift.

My parents and family were with me in the very beginning of the dream, but they
were to go to a fancy dinner and after party and such and so they took off.

At the beginning of the shift, there is one other employee there with me, and
we sort of take turns manning the register. There are some customers, but just
a steady trickle, and thats about it.

I remember at some point having to go down stairs, and out the front door, to
attend to something that was happening on the road. I forget what it was that I
had to attend to, but it didn't take long, even though it was something a
little unweildy and uncomfortable to deal with.

So I get back to the store, and the night shift is approaching. Me and the
employee are not getting many more customers so we start to pack in for our
night shift. THe employee gets an idea to put some roadblocks and stuff, to
make it look like the road is under construction, so that people will be less
inclined to come in during the night, and we can sleep through the night shift.
I tell him that I'm not going to help him set them up, and that I want nothing
to do with that, but I don't stop him either. I basically turn a blind eye to
it.

So I continue to stand at the register, but I'm getting really tired, and
honestly I'm hoping that there aren't any people that show up.

At some point, I decide to settle in to the back, and I figure if someone comes
in I will hear them, and can attend to them then.

When I go into the back, it turns out the back of the store is also something
of a dark scene. It's really hard to describe. It's like a piece of art that
has a store on an island, and the island is floating in the air, and the air is
black. And towards the back, there are some legdes that go out, which were part
of the store before it was "ripped out of the ground" and they went out. I went
out a little bit on one of them to stand on it and look out, but it was just
empty blackness, and it started to freak me out a little bit, so I walked back.

Behind the cash register, around the corner of the store, there was a small
room that I gathered some blankets together, and began to settle myself in to
go to sleep.

After I was there for some time, my parents came back. My dad talked about how
he was able to drink and eat some of the food, and how it felt amazing to
finally get back into doing regular human things. They mentiond also how, after
they ate, my mom decided she wanted to take part in a UFC fight just to see how
she would do. She described the fight to me. She was put in the octogon with
another woman, and the fight was very quick. She tapped out very quickly,
because she said taht she didn't want to get hurt. Regardless, she said she was
glad she did it.

Something really quick to mention is that, a couple days ago when I talk with
my mom, she mentioned how she is afraid to go outside alone, and that she
thought my BJJ was good. That's got to be, at least on some level, the source
for that part of the dream.

That was the extent of that dream.

The second dream takes place at first in Alliant systems office. This version
of the office was very much like the irl version, it was very undistorted and
represented the real office quite accurately.

I was at my desk, and Caitlin is talking with Valerie at her desk. The two of
them finish up their conversation, and David comes over and begins talking to
Caitlin. He begins to hit on her, and tells her that he would like to take her
to dinner. She continues to turn him down, and he continues to make advances.

I was looking on this scene, and I mention to Luis and Valerie, "What is this,
he is just making advances and she is just shutting them down. How does that
make any sense?" They both laugh, and they say, "That's pretty much how
male/female interaction works." I am confused, and I say, "Well, if that's how
it works than I'm glad I'm not a part of it. That looks uninteresting and
ridiculous."

So after they are done, Kaley, Caitlin, and one other guy, I forget who (it
might not even be an employee, now that I think about it, but some dream figure
who is an employee in the dream) all get together in a car. Kaley is carpooling
(which doesn't happen irl, but might be a reference to the Super bowl party she
is hosting) and is going to each of our places to drop us off.

So when we are in the car, I am sitting diagonal to Caitlin in the back seat,
and so I lean over to her, and I ask her, "So are you interested at all in
David? I saw he was making advances towards you." She chuckled, and started to
open up to me. We then had a conversation about her relationship status which
was quite a pleasent conversation. I don't remember the conversation line by
line, but it basically went that she wasn't particularly interested in David,
and that she was still single but eagerly waiting for the right guy.

So Kaley gets to Caitlin's house, and gets ready to drop her off, but when she
gets out, she says that she doesn't want to leave. She says she wants to stay
in the carpool and be dropped off last. I am rather happy about this sort of
thing, because it means more conversation with her, but I'm not sure for what
reason she would want to do this.

At this point in the dream, we all just get out at Caitlins house. In the dream
logic, it makes sense, since Kaley isn't going to drop everyone else off, and
then Caitlin, when Caitlin is already here, so we decide to wait there and have
conversation for as long as we desire, then when we are done, we will drop
Caitlin off and continue on towards our respective places.

It's worth noting what this house is like as well. Similar to the Barnes and
Noble, this house is on something of an island. It's it's own quint little
shack, but it's not entirely a shack since it has some brick and modern house
features, but it's a small house, old but well taken care of. There is a palm
tree on one of the corners of the house. The garage faces towards the front, on
the left side, and you can simply walk around to the back, where there is
picnic tables and things.

In the front also is a picnic table, with an umbrella. The "color" of this part
of th dream is very lush green and sky blue, but with hints of dust and clouds.
I believe the dream ends at around this point. I remember sitting on the picnic
table, and continuing our conversation. Kaley and the guy were sort of pacing
around, making comments here and there, but it was clear they were ready to
leave more than we were, but they were still enjoying the conversation.
