So today is an interesting day.

Right now it is 2:30 in the afternoon on Friday (and it just so happens to be a
"Fun" friday as my work colleagues like to put it), and I am writing in this so
as to have something to do while I bellabor over the fact that I have just
finished a somewhat tedious although not so difficult eight hour case, and I
have just accepted a four hour case which touches a few things, and I need to
do some expunging of the mind before I will be able to think clearly about this
new case that I have picked up.

Just something like thirty minutes ago, I was outside in the middle of a Wim
Hof Meditation session which lasted in total for three rounds in eleven minutes
followed by eleven times ten breathes. I did this on the top of the parking
garage at my work place, and I did so while seated on my bag which contains my
BJJ gi and other assorted nonsense.

I am quite satisfied with my ability to control my breathe in those moments and
become highly receptive to the feelings that come. I have noticed in this time
that I am rather tired, quite perpetually I would say, so it's strange to me
that I am able to continue to do things and get things done throughout the day.

Of course, that is the me that is sitting at my desk and typing that is talking
right now, and the me that was sitting on top of the parking garage and
focusing on the breath was not concerned with the fact that he felt tired.
Instead, he just continued to focus on the breath, and continued to focus on it
through the tiredness. If you had to characterize it in terms of visual images,
you could say that my tiredness was like a sheet of still water that I was
looking through towards my breathe. My breathe could have been said to have
been in the middle of a still, translucent pond, and my consciousness was
attempting to look through the pond, and focus solely on the breathe. At a
certain point, when the mind becomes fully consumed with the task at hand, the
mind begins to forget that there was a pond of tiredness in the first place,
and instead the focus becomes entirely on what needs to be done to make the
most optimal breathes.

I did this for three rounds, each round breathing in sixty power breaths, and
each round waiting for at least seventy-two heart beats. The last time was a
rather long prolonged hold, but I don't know the exactly number of heart beats
that took place. Actually, I do, it was over one-hundred-four, at least, which
surely approaches the minute and half mark.

Regardless of exactly how long I held my breath, I do want to make some
comments about the feelings and sensations I felt when I was holding my breath.

Firstly, I want to say that I find it so fascinating that one can be taken to
something that I would consider to be an different way of viewing reality just
by simply breathing in a certain way. Breathing is an activity that many of us
take for granted, and even in those cases that are the most ideal, of people
with healthy lungs and no obstructions to having full breathes, we still only
take in a portion of what our lungs are capable of. When we expose ourselves to
higher than normal levels of air intake, the sensations that one can feel
involuntarily throughout the body and limbs is one of tinglyness and numbness,
with varying degrees of intensity depending on the intensity of the breath
intake.

With that being said, the two things that I was most focused on in this session
were the following. First, was to ensure that I was maintaining a level of
awareness about my body and where it was. In other words, when as an
individual, you decide to perch yourself atop a parking garage in a place
where, if you were to fall, you would either fall four feet to hard concrete,
or forty feet to soft grass, it becomes important to recognize that there is
only a certain amount of deepness that should be sought for when pursuing these
sorts of brething exercises.

As soon as I started the breathing exercises, and I performed sixty power
brethes, by the time I was in about forty brethes deep, I started to recognize
that my blood oxygen levels were becoming elevated. It was when I took that
last inhale, followed by the last exhale, that I immeditaley recognized that I
was feeling quite dizzy, and that I might be in danger of passing out if I were
to take this to it's most dangerous extreme.

As soon as I recognized this, I knew that I had a decision to make. I could
either return to regular brething, step down from the perch, and resume life as
usual, or I could simply be aware of my awareness first, and then, second, be
aware of how long I was holding my breathe.

This is why I know for certain the number of heartbeats that took place on my
first and third retentions, it was 72 and 104, but for my second, I only know
that it is at least 72, because at certain points I knew that my first
priority, that is, staying upright on the perch and not falling over in any
direction, was in danger of being lost.

Once I finished with the three rounds, I checked my phone and saw that over
eleven minutes had gone by for those three rounds. This puts each round of
power breathes and retentions at about four minutes, which I would say is a
rather good place to be.

After this time, I decided to count my breaths for a bit. I counted up to 110
breathes before I decided to hit another lap.

It was strange, because I tried as best I could to breathe normally throughout
these 110 breathes, but I most certainly had an irregular breathing pattern as
I was still recoving from my wim hof rounds. I could feel weakness in my hands
and limbs as I knew that my body was hungering for some food, and I felt
tinglyness throughout my chest and into my fingers from the intensity through
which I had just practiced breathing.

After six minutes of this sort of attempting to breathe as normal, and getting
to the point where the tinglyness isn't going away, I finally stood up off of
the perch, and folded myself into a forward pike. I controlled my breath
throughout the pike, and attempting to breathe as comfortably as I could in
that uncomfortabel position. I was mostly focusing on my balance, and on the
fact that there weren't any cars around me (I was on top of a parking garage
after all) and on breathing in a regular way.

After about three or so minutes of the pike, I stood up for real, stopped my
stopwatch, and proceeded to walk in to work.

Now, I must say, it is a rather strange thing, practicing the Wim Hof Method so
intensely like that, immediately followed by walking in to my work place, where
I then sit at my desk and work on things. It's quite crazy to me that such a
way of living the world exists, but such it does, and so we do.

Just before that, there are some things that I would talk about, but my lawyer
has told me to redact certain words for the purposes of remaining safe.

I don't have to go into details honestly, but I just want to say that I have
met a great connection that I look forward to having a long and lasting
relationship with all up until the time that I either move out of Irving or
marijuana becomes legal in the United States.

Beyond that, I do want to say that I am rather excited that my Seth and Cain
story is near complete, but I also want to say that I am rather dissapointed
that I haven't yet gotten the sixth and final portion written yet. I have
written five out of the six parts, and the sixth is the most important one.

So at some point I will definitely need to work on that. I must go back at some
point and re-read the five sections that I have written so far to see how they
flow, and what it feels like. It is quite long already, so there might be room
to cut some lines if such a thing needs to occur. I anticipate that my final
story will be something like twenty pages long, which, while quite a lot, is
really not that much when it comes down to it.

Once I re-read that, I will then have to find the inspiration for the last
part. I have a decent idea about how it goes, but I haven't truly discovered
the ending yet. It will have to come out of me in the moment, as these things
go.


