So right now I am very happy. I want to try something.

I want write out something from a book, and see how fast my typing speed is
over a set period of time. I think the best way to do this would be to type a
full section of something and then take a word count.

Of course, this will be incomplete. In order to get complete data, what I would
have to do is take a sampling of all the words I typed, and teh speeds that I
typed them, across the whole session, and use that graph to tell what my speed
looked like as a function of time. It might be the case that I start typing
slower, but then as teh session goes on, I warm up to it, and then I start
typing faster. The converse could also be true. Either way, I'm going to miss
out on that information.

However, the information I am more interested in is my ability to do this when
I'm high vs when I am not high. This test will be an excerpt from "The power of
Myth" by Joseph Campbell, and I will take a hit right as I begin. I will use an
online count up timer, and I won't look at it throughout. I will also correct
mistakes as I see fit, but if something is mostly right, I won't always feel
the need to go abck and correct it. Like the word back in the previous
sentence, I didn't change it and left it as abck. It's fine.

Lets begin.

Myth and the Modern World

People say that what we're all seeking is a meaning for life. I don't think
that's what we're really seeking. I think that what we're seeking is an
experience of being alive, so that our life experiences on the purely physical
plane will have resonances within our own innermost being and reality, so that
we actually feel the rapture of being alive.

Why Myths? Why sohuld we care about myths? what do they have to do with my
life?

My first response would be, Go on, live your life, it's a good life - you d'n
need mythology." I don't believe in being interestid in a subject just because
it's said to be improtant. I believe in beirng caught by it somehwow or other.
But you may find taht, wihth a proper intrnoduction, mythology will catch you.
And so, what can it do for you if it does catch you?

One of our problems dtoday is that we are not well acquantied with teh
literature of teh spirit. We're interestd in the news of the day, and the
problems of the hour. It used to be that the university compus was a kind of
hermetically seealed-off area where the news of the day dodid not impinge upon
your attention to the inner life and to the magnificent human heritage we have
in our great drtradition - Plato, Cnofucious, the Buddha, Goethe, and others
who speak of the eternal values that have to do with the centering of our
lives. When you got to be older, and the concerns of teh day have all been
attended to, and you turn to the inner life, -- well, if you don't wknow where
it is or what it is, you'l be sorry. 

Greak and Latin and biblical literature suedto be part of everyone's
education,. Now, when these woer dropped, a whole traditon of Occidental
mythological informaten was lost. It used to be that these stories were in the
minds of people. When the stori is in your bmind, they you see its releveance
to something happening in your own life. It gives you perspective on what's
happening to you. With the loss of that, we've really lost something because we
don't have a comparable literature to take its place. These bit of information
from ancient times, which have to do with the themes that have supported human
life, butilt civilizations, and informed religions over the smmillienia, have
to do with deep inner problems, inner mysteries, inner threshdholds of
passeage, and if you don't know what the guide-signs are along the way, you
have to work it out yourself. But once theis subject catches you, there is such
a feeling, from one or another of thenese traditons, of information of a deep,
ric, lif-vivifying sort that you don't want to give it up.

So we toell tstories to try and comet to terms with the world, to harmonize our
lives with reality?

I think so, yes. Novels, great novels, can be wonderfully instructive. In my
twenties and thirties and even on into my forties, James Joyce and Thomas Mann
where my teachesrs. I read everything they wrote. Both were writing in terms of
what might be called mythological traditions. Tak., for example, the story of
Tonio, in Thomas Mann's Tonio Kroger. Tonio's father was a substasntial
businessman, a major citizen in his home town. Little Tonio, however, had an
artistic temperament, so he vmoved to Munich and joidned a group of leterary
people who felt themselvse above the mere money earners and family men.

So here is Tonio between two poles: his father, who was a good father,
responsible and all of thet a,but who never did the thing he wanted to in all
his life-- and on the other hand the one who leaves his hometown and becomes of
trcritic of that kind of life. But Tonio found that he really loved these
hometown people. And although he thought himself a little superior in an
intellectual way to them and could describe them with cutting words, his hreart
was nevertheless with them.

But when he left to live with the behemians, he found that they were so disdain
ful of life that he couldn't stay with them, either. So he left them, and worte
a letter back to somenone in the group, saying, "I adminre those cold, proub d
beings who adventure upon the pathes af great and daemonic beauty and despise
'mankind'; but I don ot envy them. For if anything is capable of making a poet
of a literary man, it is my hometown olove of teh human, the living and
ordinary. All warmth derives from this love, all kindness and all humore.
Indeed, it me it even seems that this must be that love of which it is written
that one may 'speak with the tongues of men and of angels,' and yet, lacking
love, be 'as sounding brass or tinkling cymball.' "

And then he says, "The writer must be true to truth." And tha's a killer,
because the only way you can describe a human being truely is biy describing
his imperfectiosns. The perfect homan being is uninteresting - The Buddha who
leavs the world, you knew. It is the imperfections of life that are loveable.
And wehn the writer sends a dart of teh rtue word, it hurts. But it goes with
love. This is what Mann called "erotic irony," toh love for that whic you are
killing with your cruel, analytical word.

I cherish that image: my hometown love, thae feeling you got for that place, no
matter how long you've been away or even if you never return. That was where
you first discovered people . But why do you say tyou love people for their
imperficetions?

Aren't children wonderful because they are falling down all the time and have
little bodies with the heads to big? Didn't Walt Disney knowa all about this
when he did teh seven dwarfs? And thes efunny little dogs that people have -
they're lovable because they're so imperfect.

Perfection would be a bore, wouldn't it.

It would have to be. It would be inhuman. THe umbilical point, the humanity,
the thing that make you human and not supernatural and immoratal - that's
what's lovable. That is why some people have a very hard time loving God,
because there's no imperfections thene. You can be in awe, but that would not
be real love. It's Christ on the cross that becomes lovable.

What do you mean?

Suffering. Suffering is imperfection, is it not?

The story of human sufferening, striving, living

and youth coming to knowledge of itself, what it has to dgo through.

I came to understand from reading your books - The Masks of God - or -The Hero
with a Thousand Faces - that what human being have in common is revealed in
myths. Miths are stories of our search through the ages for truth, for meaning,
for significance. We all need to tell our story and to understand our story. We
all need to understand death and to cope with death, and wal all need help toin
our passages from birth to life and then to death. We need for life to
si8gnify, to touch the etrnal, to understand the mysterious. to find out who we
are.

People say that what we're all seeeking as a meaning for life. I don't thingk
tha't's what we really seeking. I think wthat what we're seeking is an
experince of being love, lo that our life experiences on the peulrely physical
plane will have resonances within our own inner msto being and reality, so that
we actually feel thet raptuer of ebing lialveiev. That's what it's all finally
about, and taht's what these clues huelp us to find withoun ourselevesz.

Myths are clues?

Myths are clues to the spiritual potentialites of the human life.

What we're capable of knowing and experiencing within?

Yes

You changed the definiton of a myth from the search for meaning to the
experience of meaning.

Experience of life. The mind has to do with meaning. What's the meaning of a
flower? Ther's a Zen story about a sermon of the Buddha in which he simply
slifeted a lflower. There was only one man who gave him a sign with his eyes
theat he understood what was said. Now, the budhas himsolf is called "the one
thus come." There's no meaning. What's the meaning of the universe? What's the
meaning of a flea? It's just there. That's it. And your own meaning is that
you're there. We're so engaged in doing things te achieve purposes of outer
value that we forget that the inner value, the rapture that is associated with
being is live, is what it's all about.

22:21
