Cain replied again, "As I see it, I can't dwell on what happened in the past. I
could not have known that he was so weak that he could die to a bear, and so
now I understand that not all humans are created with the same facilities as
everyone else. I understand that about you now as well. If only I had known
that about Abel at that point, I would not have told him to fight that bear,
but I could not have known that. And regardless, had I not forced him into that
fight, he would have eventually run into some sort of wild creature and failed
to fight it and die. After all, I could not always be around him to protect
him, that would be silly. The man would have died by a bear in one way or
another anyway."

"And how do they stand right now?" Seth asked.

That is from yesterday. Today, I want to get back to writing my story. Before I
do that, more typeracer.

So I have just come back from typeracer, and I have warmed myself up for typing
rather well with that, if I do say so myself. I am to the point where I am able
to think words, and for the most part, they come out of my fingers with
relative ease. It's quite relaxing to do this, to be honest, because it allows
me to say something, and look like I'm working, but really I am just writing
out a story into the text editor here. But no one really cares, and I am able
to keep typing away at my keyboard like this.

Something I do want to say, that I have come up with lately, is this idea to
get two keyboards, one with one kind of switches, and another with a different
type of switches. Then, I will go to Kyle's place, and tell him Happy Brithday,
and that he gets a keyboard. I will give him the Red set, and see if he likes
the browns at all. But I will give him the red set first, and then, if he would
prefer Browns, I would show him the browns, and see which one he likes. I can
then have a reason for taking the other one. If he chooses the reds, then I can
say "I don't have many keyboards with browns, so it's good to have some
variety." And if he chooses the browns, I can say, "Well, reds are my favorite
anyway, it's always good to have more of what I want."

I want to do this for two reasons. One, because I know Kyle has mentioned a
keyboard, and I would like to get him something, and two, because I personally
want to try out the browns, but I am afraid to go away from buying reds. This
will give me an excuse to buy two keyboard, each with different switch caps,
and compare them side by side. Then I can give whichever one to Kyle, and keep
the other one for myself.

The problem with that right now though is that I have financing on my new car,
so the prospect of spending a bunch of money on keyboards right now seems less
appealing then before.

But still, give it some time, and I will do this for Kyle.

Regardless, I want to get back to my story. Want to re write what I was writing
yesterday, and I want to go on from there.

Cain replied again, "As I see it, I can't dwell on what happened in the past. I
could not have known that he was so weak that he could die to a bear, and so
now I understand that not all humans are created with the same facilities as
everyone else. I understand that about you now as well. If only I had known
that about Abel at that point, I would not have told him to fight that bear,
but I could not have known that. And regardless, had I not forced him into that
fight, he would have eventually run into some sort of wild creature and failed
to fight it and die. After all, I could not always be around him to protect
him, that would be silly. The man would have died by a bear in one way or
another anyway."

There was a pause in the room. Seth remained quiet for some time. Then he said,
"Although you justify your actions now with naivity and innocence, I am not so
inclined to believe you. In fact, was it not our mother who was decieved by a
sweet tongued serpent, and told to eat of the fruit of the tree of life. How
can I be so sure that you are not decieving me now in the way that the serpent
decieved my mother."

Cain first let out a snort, followed by a chuckle, followed by a full on belly
laugh. "Oh, my sweet sweet Seth. I can garuntee you that I am not a serpent. I
am not a beast. I am not a bird, or a bug, or a devil. All of these things I am
not. I am merely a human. Look at me, and feel my flesh. Does it not feel the
same as your own flesh and blood? Listen to me, and hear my words. Do my words
not sound the same as the words of a man? Place your ear to my heart. Does the
heart of a devil beat in the same way as the heart of a human? I think not. I
am no devil. I am but a man, just as you."

Seth let out a laugh. He had to admit, he was still apprehensive about his new
found brother, Seth's parents did paint him to be quite the villian, but having
just now met him, he couldn't help but feel that he was reuniting with a lost
and misunderstood soul.

After the two were done laughing, Cain was actually the one to break the
silence.

"So Mom and Dad still tell all the stories about "God" and "The Devil", huh?"

Seth looked at him strangely. "Tell stories? Well, if you mean that they still
relate their past to their children, then yes, they have told me about how we
got here and who we are."

Cain scoffed, "Huh, you are silly to believe those stories child. They are not
as coherent as you might think. I have seen many things in my day, but I have
not seen serpents gather up on their tails and talk as though they were human.
That just simply doesn't happen."

"So then how do you suppose mom and dad came up with the story?" Seth retorted,
"Do you think they just made it up? For what reason would they have to lie to
us."

Cain eyed Seth with a curious look. "You haven't tried them, have you? No, of
course you wouldn't, Mom and Dad wouldn't show you the powers that led us to
this point."

Seth was confused. "If you mean the powers of God, and of the devil, then Mom
and Dad have told me that."

Cain inturrupted. "No, no, not the stories. Seth, let me tell you, and it's sad
that I, as your brother, must make you aware of this. There is a special kind
of mushroom that grows in the soil here. When you eat of this mushroom, the
fabric of the universe unfolds before your eyes. You see things for how they
truly are. You no longer have the cloud of darkness shrouded over your eyes.
Your spirit can open up, and it can truly see the world for how it is. I take
it you know nothing about these mushrooms?"

Seth shook his head.

"Shame. Well, perhaps when you're older, and you're able to break away from our
parents, I will be able to feed you some of these mushrooms."

Seth felt uneasy. "But didn't the mushrooms come from the tree of knowledge?
Isn't that what mother ate, which caused her and father to fall? Are you
suggesting we eat it as well?"

Cain looked at his brother. "Oh, it's worse than I feared. I'm sorry, Seth, but
the answer to that question is a resounding Yes. You see, if we must use the
context of their story, the race of human beings has fallen. Mom and dad
already did the thing. Before they had any children, they ate of the fruit of
the tree of knowledge, and with that, they began to understand the doings of
the world. And since they now understand the doings of the world, they
understand the importance of having children and multiplying before they die.
So they had us. But, since they are the first parents, they are not sure how to
do it. You see, with me, the fed me the mushrooms from the tree of knowledge as
soon as I was born. They raised me to be an adult, and I provided them with
food. But when Abel was born, they decided against feeding him the mushrooms.
So Abel grew up innocent, without the knowledge of good and evil, and without
the revelation of his birth being revealed to him. This was well and good, but
it cause much turmoil between Abel and I as we grew up. Abel was always the
idealist, naive and innocent, always going on about beautiful crops, and
utopias. Me, having eaten the mushrooms, know that such a utopia simply cannot
exist, it's not within the realms of what our universe can do. So I stuck to
protecting the cottage from wild creatures. He and I agreed to disagree for the
most part, but then, eventually, he decided that he wanted to confront me.
Well, you know the rest of the story from there."

Seth was silent during this entire explanation. Cain continued. "So I suppose,
not only did Mom and Dad not feed you the mushrooms at all, but they also
simply didn't tell you that they existed."

Seth shook his head, timidly.

"What did they tell you about the mushrooms?" Cain asked.

Seth shook his head, "Nothing, at all. They just told me that the tree
contained fruit, and that after they ate of it, God kicked them out of the
garden, and they were forced to find their way out here."

Cain chuckled again. "Yeah, 'God' kicked them out all right. Well, when they
were on mushrooms, they felt the presence of God, and that presence told each
of them what they needed to do, and they both agreed that staying in the Garden
was not the correct course of movement."

Seth inturrupted. "Hold on, wait a minute here. I want to get one thing clear.
Does God exist or not?"

Cain chuckled. "If you mean, is there a being that exists in another dimension
that somehow create us, and everything, and that he was the one that put the
tree in the garden, then no. But if you mean that, inside all of us, there is a
voice that seems to have greater authority than our own voice, that we can
listen to and become receptive to, then in that sense, it is the case that such
a voice exists inside every human being. What the mushrooms do is take that
voice, magnify it, and reveal what it wants to say to you. God is inside all of
us, and it's the knowledge of good and evil that allows us to truly understand
what it means to say something like, 'The spirit of God exists'"

Seth was more confused now. "I don't understand. Why would our parents say that
God is real when they know he is not."

Cain shrugged. "I honestly don't know. Perhaps they want him to be real. Or
perhaps they really do think he is real in that sense. Maybe it's impossible to
tell someone who hasn't experienced God what it really means to experience him.
You should eat some mushrooms with me, and it will make sense to you.

"Absolutely not!" Seth objected. "I will not eat the mushrooms. Mind you, I'm
still not so convinced that you aren't some sort of devil trying to tempt me to
something! I'm warry of your words."

Seth laughed again. "I am not the devil, young Seth. We have already
established this. I can see what I am saying is not making sense to you. That's
okay. It doesn't have to make sense. All I'm saying is that the fruit of the
tree of Knowledge is a difficult thing to grapple with, so our parents are most
likely acting under the assumption that if you didn't know about it at all,
then perhaps you can remain pure.

"This is well and good, all up until the point where, because there are humans
that have eaten of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, you must eventually know
about it. A human that does not fall to the will of the fruit of the tree will
only perish in time having never experienced that power. I pray, Seth, that
such a fate does not befall you. Let my words ruminate inside of you, and think
about it when you are older."

At this, Seth could only cry. He cried a little, and then he cried a lot. "I
don't understand." Seth said through tears. "I don't know who to trust now. Are
you telling me the truth, or are our parents? How will I ever know? How should
I know who to trust?"

Cain placed his hand on Seth's shoulder, and said, "Listen Seth, when you
discover the truth, it won't be from Mom and Dad, and it won't be from me. When
you discover the truth, it will be from within yourself. You won't have to
trust anyone, you will simply know what the truth is from your soul. Trust
nobody except yourself."

Seth asked again, "Why should I trust you then? Why should I listen to you at
all."

And cain replied, "You can listen to me, but you don't have to trust me. I
don't require your trust, I just require your ear, and your mind. I am telling
you things as best I can describe them. This is what I have discovered from my
life here on this world. This is what I know. I have told it to you. You don't
have to believe me. In fact, you probably shouldn't believe me. It would be a
better life for you if you were able to continue to live it blissful naivity.
But it seems that I have already ruined that. I have told you about the
mushrooms of the tree of knowledge, and with that knowledge, I have placed
inside of you, in spite of our parents best efforts, a curiosity towards the
transcendent reality. But this reality comes at a cost, a cost that our parents
already payed. And so, you too, will fall one day. I'm sorry, I suppose this is
my second tragedy. The first innocent one I killed, and the second I only made
curious of the mushrooms that would give him life. So for that, I apologize.
But when you come to it, you will know, and you will be able to act on your own
to satisfy your curiosity and understanding of the world, and when you do, you
will see what God is, and you will see what the Devil is. And perhaps you will
see even more. We can't say. So don't trust me. I am merely attempting to tell
you the truth as best I am able, to save you the headache of having to discover
everything I did on your own. It's up to you to decide if whether or not what I
say resonates with you on a deeper level, but even if it doesn't, you will have
stronger convictions of yourself either way."

Seth was visibly upset. Still, he asked, "Will I ever see you again?"

Cain replied, "I can't say. I would think no, and certainly not if you still
live with Mom and Dad, but if you want to seek me out again, you are welcome to
do so. But if that ever happens, it will mean that you have eaten of the
mushrooms of the tree of life, and instead of seeking me, you will go on your
own path. So either way, probably not."

Cain let that hang there for a moment before he continued. "But hey, it's not
all bad. After all, all I can do is hunt. When the game runs out, my family, my
empire, will die. But you have a sustainable way to maintain your family. You
can grow crops for them, and feed them, and even protect them. You are a great
man, Seth, and I can see that you will do great things. My fate is to die. I
can see that."

Seth processed the words for a moment. "How do you know your fate?" Seth asked,
although the he thought he might know the answer.

Cain replied, "I don't. I just see where my life is taking me. I am saying, if
the way I see the flow of time work out, I'm going to kill all of the game,
until there is no more game to kill, and my sons will kill game, and their sons
will kill game, and all of them will kill game, and they will eat the game.
Eventually, my sons will have no more game to kill, and they will die off. But
you, you will never run out of seasons to farm. THe farm provides to you, so
you're kind will live long."

Seth was crying. "Maybe, maybe you can stay with us, you could become a farmer,
I could teach you. You can help me in the fields, and you can help me with the
animals. The plows, the feeders, all of it, you can help me with the equipment.
I could use another set of hands. Come back to us, brother, and be a part of
the family."

Cain chuckled again, as he does. "Seth, I can't do that. Mom and Dad have
banished me. I killed their son. They don't want me around any more. I was
their failed experiment. They gave me some of the mushrooms, and then I killed
their son. They see me as a demented outcast, impure in teh ways that they
think are important. They attach so much significance to their action of eating
the fruit of the tree of knowledge, that they can't see past their own lives.
They can't glimpse into the lives of others. Or they can, but they don't know
how, so they don't. They can't glance in to my life, they only presume that the
mushrooms made me murderous and hot tempered. They see me as a warped and
twisted puppet of the devil, no longer even human. They talk to me as if I am
some sort of monster, or beast of the wild. And maybe I am. I feel more at
peace in the wild then I do at home. That's why I can't join you. It's not
because our parents have forbidden it, it's because I have exiled myself from
their way of life. It's my choice to seperate myself from the farm. It's better
for everyone that way. Mom and dad are afraid I might kill them one day if I
join you in the dinner table. And the cold truth is, I just might. So it's
better for everyone if I stay out of your life."

"Would you really kill mom and dad?" Seth asked.

"Eh..." Cain let it trail off. "It's hard to say. The only way to know would be
for me to live with them again, but it seems that satisfying that curiosity has
not bearing on our lives from here on, and there is nothing to gain from that.
So I suppose the answer is no, because I would banish myself again before I
killed them. But if banishment weren't an option, I just might. Which is why
they don't ever want to see me, because I tell them I might kill them, and they
know that it's true what I say."

Seth replied, "But they just don't understand. We can resolve our differences.
What happened with Abel was a fluke, you said it yourself. It was a
misunderstanding, something of an accident. You shouldn't have to live in the
shadow of what you did for the rest of your life." Seth felt strange defending
Cain to his face like this. He wasn't sure what point he was arguing anyway.

Cain grinned, and looked out the window. "Seth, Abel had a life, and because of
his encounter with me, he no longer lives. I can justify it by saying that any
encounter with the wild would have met Abel with the same fate, but in some
sense, his encounter with me was that encounter with the wild. I was the wild
that Abel encountered, and he did not survive it. Now, you would survive, I can
tell by the way you hold yourself, but that's not the point. The point is, our
parents see me as something completely foreign to them, and I see my parents as
being stubborn and unmoving. As long as they are that stubborn about me, I
would come to kill them if I were in a position to, and they will remain
stubborn about me for as long as I hold that view point. I am not changing my
views on them, so therefore, they will remain stubborn towards me. It won't
change, and it can't change. This is my fate now."

Seth replied, "Maybe our parents won't change their mind about you, but maybe
you could change your mind about them. They are not all bad, you know. I get
it, they can be bummers sometimes, but you should be able to come to accept
them."

Cain replied, "No, Seth, I can't. When I tell you about the truth, the truth
that I see is incongruent with the truth that they see. The mushrooms have
shown me the understanding of the voices inside myself, where as the mushrooms
only showed them their guilt, and that guilt has grown to be their god. Guilt
should not be your God, and as long as guilt is their God, then we can never
see eye to eye."

Seth replied, "It's not too late. You can come back. I can teach you, train
you. You can become a farmer yet. You don't even have to accept mom and dad,
you just have to promise not to kill them. Just please don't leave me, I need
you."

At this, Cain gave pause. "I'm sorry, Seth. I cannot be there for you. I know
the reason you say this is because what I am telling you makes sense to you,
but you know you will not be able to stand up to mom and dad. Well, as someone
who has been forced to stand up to mom and dad, let me tell you, it's not that
bad. Find your mind, and speak it. They will want to warp and twist your mind
into what they want it to be. And that may be healthy for you to some extent.
But when you find something, deep in your heart, that you know to be true, hold
on to that, and don't let go of it. That is the most important thing that you
can have. And that thing isn't God. Or at least, it's not God as you know it.
No, rather, God is that thing. Yes, that thing, whatever it is, in that truth
you will find your own power of God. And if you eat the mushrooms, you will see
it. But even if you don't I believe that you will come to understand it inside
your soul. That is the thing that you must cling to, Seth."

Cain paused. "But I must go," he continued. "My place is not here. Take my
strength, Seth, and use it when you need it most."

With that, Cain held Seth's head in his hands, and kissed him on the forehead.
After that, he stood him up, placed his hand under Seth's chin, and pointed his
eyes towards his own.

"I am a man, just like you. I am made out of the same flesh as your flesh, and
the same blood as your blood. Any thing that I can do, you can also do. See
yourself not as the subserviant of our parents, but instead as your own man,
flourishing into existance. Every birth is a tragedy. But it's the call of that
person being born to accept their own tragedy of existance, and intergrate it
into the world. Seth, take your tragedy, and go forth into the world with it."

Cain kissed Seth on the forehead, one last time, and opened up the door.
Outside of the door was bright, and glowing with the afternoon sun. Cain walked
out the door, gathered his belongings in his sack, and walked off. Seth watched
him all the way, as Cain walked between the hills, into the ravine, and
finally, off into the distance behind a bend. Cain never once looked back at
Seth.

Seth watched as Cain walked in the distance. After he walked off, he watched
the sun set in the direction Cain walked towards, and he stayed in the cabin,
in isolation for the rest of the night. He wept. Then, when he stopped weeping,
he wept some more.

This was the first, and last, time that Cain and Seth ever met. The fates of
both individuals after this meeting each could be it's own story on it's own,
but suffice it to say, both individuals were deeply impacted by their encounter
with the other.

Here ends the dialogue of Seth and Cain.

