The poison of subjectivism.

This work opens with Lewis speaking of the dangers of subjectivism over event
totalinarianism. He says that to even begin to speak of subjectivism requires
subjective capability over ones own faculty of reason.

Some say that "Good and Bad" are mere feelings. If these people are right, then
it might be correct to "reprogram" what we feel about "good and evil." Lewis
argues that it is not man's place to do this. The measuring stick of morality
is not something that is allowed to change. How could someone say, "better" if
"good" is allowed to be relative?

However this man elects to make things better will always be predisposed to a
priori assumptions about the existance of man.

Lewis makes two "ground in ink" assumptions in this paper.

1. Humans cannot create values
2. When we try, we simply take an existing value and elevate it above the rest.

Any "construction" of values is mere illusion, and is dangerous to do.

Sticking to traditional values does not leave us stagnant. We can grow in our
understanding of historical values, and as humans we constantly strive towards
a more moral life.

Also, while different systems of morality may be different in presentation,
they are alike in their themes.

There are also problems with more liberal interpretations of Christianity. If
there is discontinuity between what is considered good by God and good by man,
then man is lost.

But if Goodness comes from God, then which came first? Both views are not
acceptable. Lewis reconciles this problem by appealing to our understanding of
the impossibleness of the trinity of God.

In conclusion, man cannot create good and judge it to be good, because to judge
the created good as good must mean that there was a pre-existing, absolute
sense of the word good in the first place.

THis conclusion has implications in choosing leaders, and in day to day
affairs.
