So right now I would like to write out a bunch of stuff, and say things like,
the purpose of dreams is to follow a train of thought and backtrace it, and in
the backtracing process, a lot of stuff will get caught in the crossfire, and
the more complicated a subject is, the more it will be represented by what
comes out of the crossfire. And in writing sentences like that, I am able to
let the reader know that, for the right now, for the time being, I want to
write out whatever I want to write. That is the great thing about writing, is
that you can write whatever you want, and when you do, it comes out as this
continuous thing, a thing that forces you to take what you already know and put
it on a page. And when you put it on the page, it is there to be read, and read
aloud, and re organized, and restructured, and placed in conjunction to
something else, and so on, and all of that kind of stuff can be done in the
post edit. But in the pre edit, it's important to have a sort of flow, from one
sentence to the next, where it's easy to see how the sentence before led to the
sentence after, and also how it's easy to see how the sentence after came from
the sentence before.

So in this sense, I just want to start writing. I am going to write now about
some of my experience with dreams.

So over the past six or so months, I have been rather diligently keeping a
journal, and sometimes this journal will have dreams, and other times it will
have random happenstance, and other times it will be empty. But in this past
six months, I would say that I have had some sort of dream, whether significant
or not, about two to three times a week. There would be some nights, where I
would wake up and I would have two dreams to remember, and then the next night,
I would have a big significant dream, and then, for six nights in a row after
that, I don't have much more than dream fragments. And so on with a similar
pattern with some sort of average frequency of two to three dreams a week, over
an average of six months.

So with that being said, here is something I want to say about dreams, and
about dream interpretation. The first thing that I want to say is that I have
no background in psychology, and this is just the thoughts as they come up to
my head from my whatever thoughts come out of. So I just want to dispel any
idea that I am some how qualified to make the kinds of statements that I am
making.

With that out of the way, I want to say this about dreams.

I have had dreams, where when I wake up from them, I am so at peace, and
silent, and still, and even though I know that, in the next twenty minutes, I
will have to wake up for real, and go to work, I can just lie on the ground and
fantasize about the dream. I don't care if I go back to sleep or not. I just
want to think about that place, because it is so beautiful, and I just woke up,
and I am still tired.

I will have other dreams, where I will wake up, and think to myself, "What am I
doing in my life that a dream like that will present itself to me?" It really
quite amazes me. These dreams have full plot lines, character backgrounds,
familial drama, and a good amount of violence sometimes as well. They involve a
full on journey, a sort of call to adventure into the adventure, but in the
dream it's all just acting out, I'm not thinking about it, I'm just watching
it, and thinking through what I would do in these scenarios. And when it's
happening, it seems normal, and it remains sustained throughout the dream, but
when I wake up, I think about how much my brain was filling this dream world
with, and I can't help but try and speculate the thinking processes that would
have conjured up this world as it is.

So this is the sort of conclusion, rudimentary and anacdotal though it is, a
conclusion that represents my best manner of describing how I understand
dreams, and what they are.

So every dream starts from the waking state. And before we make the objection
that it feels as though some dreams start in the middle, for now lets just
write these sorts of objections in the realm of "we'll come back to it" and
move on.

So from the waking state, things that we call thoughts begin to appear. When we
meditate, we can meditate in one of two ways. We can either focus on the
breathe, and let the thoughts pass through themselves, or, we can do it the
other way, and focus on the thoughts, and use the breathe to keep us grounded
in that process.

So what happens, when you focus on your thoughts deeply, is that you begin to
become "lost" in them. And it's difficult to distinguish when you become "lost"
in thought from when you are merely "focused" on your thoughts, but there is
one great way I have found that sorts this out. If you are able to trace back
your current thoughts to their origin in a one to one manner, without any
inteference from other brain activity, then you are focused on your thoughts.
If you cannot say from what your thoughts originated on, and no matter how hard
you think about it, you can't get there, or you do, but there is a lot of
interference, if that happens, then you are beginning to "lose" your thoughts,
and enter the dream world.

So to go back to our first objection now, at this point, which if we remind
ourselves, was the objection that some dreams feel like they start in the
middle. This is why.

When most people go to sleep, they do not focus on their thoughts. They just go
to sleep. In this sense, they are already "lost in thought" before they even go
to sleep. They are mindlessly brushing teeth, putting on pajamas, taking a
shower, putting teh kids to bed, and getting food ready for the morning, and
she has been caught up in all of that the she has been lost in thought. And so,
by the time this lady lays down, she has been lost in thought for some time
now. She is not quite lost in thought, because if we asked her in her waking
moments why she was doing what she was doing, she could have given us a reason
that went back to keeping things tidy, and managing her kids lives. But the
point is, she didn't make that backtrace. Instead, everything is on autopilot.
She sees a toy on teh floor, she picks it up, and puts it in the bin. She is
not thinking about the effects that are going on in her brain and in her body
rgiht now, she is simply responding to stimulus and taking appropiate action.

So with that happening, up to the moment she lies down, this person has not
been aware of her thoughts. Perhaps, during the day sometimes, when someone
makes her really angry, she will have to "recenter" herself, but this is not
true mindfullness, but just a crutch to help her cope with something that she
is unable to deal with herself.

This solves the riddle of why it seems as though dreams start in the middle.
It's because, at the point when we are "rebooted" into actually observing our
thoughts, it's when they've become so muddled and lost that not even our brain
knows what to do with them. The dream is the brains way of "getting to" the
human when thoughts lead to contradictinos. THe brain wants an example of what
to do in certain situations, because the brain thinks that solutions to these
problems will lead to solutions for whatever it is that led the brain to that
train of thought. So the brain will "play those things out for us" and what we
see when we become mindful of our dream is a bunch of clumped together thoughts
and ideas that are playing themselves out because the brain wants to know how
to respond in those events.

So for instance, I would say most of the biblical stories would be dreams. And
the thing about he biblical stories, is that have been attached with a motive
on to them. That is, they are told with some intent. The story says X so
therefore Y is true. Well, the point is that X is a common scenario, not that
the answer is always Y.

But for instance, Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden. They agree, if either one
of them eats of the fruit of the garden, then the other one will also. The next
day, Eve requests to go off and work on her own, and when she is, a serpent
begins speaking to her. She is startled, because serpents don't usually talk,
and asks it, "Oh my, how is it that a serpent is able to talk."

And the serpent replies, "Ah, I simply at of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge, and now I can speak. It's really quite a wonderful fruit. You should
try it."

At that moment, Eve has a shift in perspective, she goes from thinking the
fruit of the tree of knowledge is like a poison. Now, she sees it as the fruit
which gives wisdom of things. And of course, her and adam are always seeking
for wisdom, so it suddenly seems to her to be the most beautiful fruit in all
of the garden. She decides she will eat of the fruit, and tell Adam about it
after, because when she explains the whole scenario to him, it will make sense
to him in the same way that it makes sense to her, and she knows this.

So she eats of the fruit, picks another fruit, and comes to adam with it. She
says, "I have eaten of teh tree of knowledge, and I deem that you should do the
same." Adam is scared, and says, "Eve, I was just talking with God, he told me
that there is a demon named beelezabub wandering through the regions of earth,
disguising himself as a serpent, and using angelic powers to try and captivate
and lure us. For what reason would you eat of the tree of knowledge?"

At this point, Eve realizes her mistake, and say, "Oh Adam, while you were
talking with God, I was tending to the Gardens, and I tell you I ran across
this serpent, this one you call Beelazabub, and he told me about the tree and
it's wisdom. And I tell you, Adam, now that I have eaten from the tree, I can
not go back, and I must have you with me on this side of wisdom. Please eat the
apple"

And to this, Adam was torn, because to God he made an oath never to eat of the
tree of Knowledge, but to Eve made an oath that if either of them ate, the
other would as well. And he thought, it could have just as easily been he that
was lured by satan, and in that situation, he would be grateful if Eve would
fall with Him.

So he decided to fall, so that he may be with Eve.

This is a dream. There is no moral in it. It is merely a story which invokes
certain feelings in such a crystalized way. When told like this, I am obviously
skewing it towards how I would like to see Adam and Eve played out. But the
point is, something like this can take the form of a dream.

Now, it's diffiuclt to connect something like Adam and Eve to a dream. And of
course, it's difficult to say whether or not something like Adam and Eve was
orginially a dream to some human, or whether it was something like a shared
collective experience of story telling. It's hard to know it what way something
like this story would come to be in the old days of agriculture and hunting.

So I want to talk a bit about where I think dreams come from, and what the
contents might mean, and also how it might relate to things like art, and
cinema.

So when you meditatate, and you are fully attentitve ,and you meditate on your
thoughts, you start to find really quickly that the thoughts tend to take a
form of their own. At the start, they are innocent enough, but as they go on,
the thoughts will each bellow forth from your own personal abyss, and if you
pay attention to them, many of them will just present themselves to you.

Now, the thing to remember is, this abyss is created out of the thoughts that
you have been harboring. So throughout all of the days, we have many thoughts,
but we are not mindful of them. They just happen, and then we act on them, and
then we forget them. And this is good for things we do by habit, or for things
that don't need to be further refined. But some of these thoughts can't be
satisfied with a mere action. Some thoughts manifest themselves as something of
a challenge. We are brought up with some thought, and perhaps there is
something in our life which is prompting these thoughts, and when these
thoughts happen, we are often not sure of teh solution, or we are aware that
the solution is far off. So these thoughts, instead of going away, they got
stored back. At first, they get put in short term memory, so that we can decide
to what extent we would like to process it, then, if it stays in short term
memory for some time, and no resolution is found, and it must be put aside for
other thoughts, it will get placed in to "the abyss." Now, the abyss is
layered. It has the outermost layer, and that is the layer with the most
recent things on it. As you go in, you start to find deeper and deeper things
that have been brought up, addressed, and then sent back into the abyss. These
things get buried deep into the abyss.

Doing abyss maintainence is merely being mindful of your thoughts, and deciding
in what ways you can attempt to conquer the things that bring themselves up.
Many times, our abyss becomes large, because we take a task that we want to
accomplish, and we try and break it up into small chunks, but even those chunks
seem large, so we are stuck weilding around the large chunks of a problem. And
so, while it may seem like we are putting much effort in to try and move the
chunks around, we are actually being very innefficient in any sort of long term
way towards have a more functional abyss.

What mindfulness does is it allows you to follow your thoughts, and when they
get to a certain point, a point that is unlike the original thought, you must
backtrace the current thought to the original thought. In doing this backtrace,
you will undoubtably encounter something else along the way. It will either be
a song, or an image, or a mathematical formula, or something that is related to
the thing that you were thinking about. So from there, given that the original
thought, and the train it led to, were not too convoluted, you can start to
draw coorlations between the thoughts you have and the thoughts that they lead
to. Then, when you are able to backconnect your "led to" thought back to the
thoughts which led to them, you can begin to reach a level of self
understanding that transforms the way you see the world.

So what the dream is is, when the abyss becomes backed up, and the thoughts in
the deepest parts of the abyss want to bring themselves to life again, with
this power of back tracing, you can more accurately remember, or make a
correlation to, the thing is was that led to these thoughts. It's important to
remember, that the only reason dreams will ever appear strange is because of
the things that get caught up in the backtracing. If you remembered every
thought that led to a certain vision appearing in your minds eye, then having
that vision there would make perfect sense. The only reason it doesn't make
sense is because, when we have not been mindful, and we suddenly get awoken
into mindfulness by our dream state, we are completely lost as to what sorts of
thoughts led us to the point where we are now. With this sudden shift, what we
are left with is multiple iterations of back and forthness of thoughts, and the
train that they lead to, followed by backpropogation. When this happens in a
mindless, and thoughtless, manner, the thoughts that eventually spawn as a
result will be symbols of things unique to the person having the visions. So
for instance, a cross in one dream might connect someone to their aunt, who was
religious, and the reason it's coming up is because your aunt always used to
say, "Ain't that sweet" any time a child did something stupid, and you know a
child who did something stupid, and you don't know how to treat him, so your
brain is presenting you with this dream, with the image of a cross, because the
train of thought which originated the dream came down and then backpropageted
enough times to lead to the cross. However, to someone else, a religous zealot,
who sees a cross, it probably has nothing to do with his aunt, because it much
more clearly represents to him his sense of self, and well being. So in this
way, he may have dreams with a cross glowing in front of himself, or images of
the cross at the end of a long and hard and painful road, or other such images,
and due to the nature of his understanding of the cross as "The thing that
Jesus died on" allows him to have dreams of that nature. A third person might
have a dream about a cross, and his dream could be drawing material from the
cross shaped lightsaber in the Star Wars Sequels. In this way, it is up to the
dreamer to know what sorts of symbols will mean what sorts of things for him.

So I think, just as important as it is to write down your dreams as accurately
as you can, I think it's also just as important to write out your thoughts as
accurately as you can. When you write out your thoughts, you start to see how
one train of thought can lead to another. When you let your thoughts go, and
you try and trace them, you should practice letting your thoughts go into a
sort of crazy place, and then connect the craziness back to the original thing
you had the thought of. The more you are able to do this, the more dreams will
just "make sense" to you.
