So at this point is the point in the day when I type a bunch of random nonsense
in to this keyboard and see what comes out of it. You see, just by the mere act
of thinking words, and then typing them on the page, I am exercising a part of
my brain that needs to become second nature if writing is ever to become second
nature for me.

What this does is that it allows me to practice just the act of conjuring up
words and then reciting them into my fingers. WHen I do this, it allows me to
think in terms of a train of thought, and at some point, the words just sort of
come in to existance as if by magic.

But to get in to this sort of state of trance, you must have uninturrupted
concentration for some time. I am not going to be able to achieve that level of
concentration at this time, becasue right now I am merely waiting for the
structure update to finish, and it is taking quite some time, so i decided I
would free write in here in the mean time while the structure update for the
database that I am working on completes.

And I am still quite surprised that I am still able to type things here, while
the structrue update completes. I feel it is appropiate to mention that I am
listening to some music right now. I am attempting to get in to what I called
earlier a "trance" writing state, and I wish to stay in this state for as long
as I can.

The whole point of this exercise is to get in to the writing trance as quickly
as possible, and to sustain that trance for as long as possible (or as long as
I decide to do for that session). Once I'm able to do this, I am to the point
where I can go in and out of writing states at will, and once I can do that, I
become one step closer to becoming the writer that I want to be.

Another cool thing about this exercise is that it gives me a sense for how long
has been going on since  Istarted typing here. I was waiting for the structrue
update, and it was taking an inorrdinately long time to finish, because it was
stuck on one field. However, I have noticed in the past that as of late,
structure updates have been hanging up like that, in that exact way. So I
decided to keep writing, and wait it out, and listen to the music I was
listening to, and wait for the structure update to finish that particular field
(that field is hh_freq if the future me that may or may not be reading this
cares at all)

The structure update literally just finished, so I will put up the typing for
now.

--


