So I have had an idea about another one of my ideas about writing mathematical
things that everyone should know. That thing is Data Structures. I'll start
with a Linked List, followed by an Array List, into sort algorithms, into
things like heaps, hashtables, and discrete sets.

The first thing to do for such an article would be to first outline the most
essential findings in a sort of Outline, or Abstract, of the whole thing. Then,
there would be something like the "main course" of Data Structures, detailing
what happens at a high level, hitting all of the key findings, as a main
article. Then, there will be a list of addendums, each addendum being an
elaboration on a result gained, with more details about what everything means,
with a satisfactory argument giving an intuitive understanding about how this
addendum is important to the overall whole of the subject.

I think, any sort of course on Data Structures will have to begin by talking
about lists. We could even go so far back as to talk about things like arrays
and such. If we want to go super low level, we could even talk about how
something like ram is accessed at the assembelly level.

But beyond that, we takes some object like an array as a given, and we then
talk about things like how to construct an ArrayList from an Array.

From there, we would define the methods that act on the ArrayList. For
instance, Add, Remove, Retrieve, as well as whatever internal methods are
useful for performing those jobs.

From there, we could talk about a semantically equivilent, but computationally
less efficient (generally speaking) kind of list, that being the LinkedList. We
could quickly implement the same methods in as an ArrayList, and show that
certain opeartions for a linked list are slow in comparison to the ArrayList
operations, and teh downsides of teh ArrayList are vastly overshadowed by the
inefficiency of the LinkedList. However, I like the LinkedList, because it
introduces us to the idea of what I call Class -> Object Recursion. That is,
when a Class has, as one of it's members, an object, the type of this object
being the class itself.

From there, the next article could go in to this would be sorting algorithms.
We would talk about in place sorting algorithms, and then out of place sorting
algorithms. This gives us a place to talk about heaps, and introduce us to the
out of place, "Heap Sort". We can also talk about the recursive definition of
Quicksort that has only three lines of code.

Next, I'd want to talk about dictionaries, what they are useful for, and why
they should be used. Also, a note here about the dangers of associated arrays.
Hashtables should be useful here also.

Lastly, I think the final thing to talk about in data structures and algorithms
would be firstly, the maze generation algorithm provided by the Discrete Set
data structure, and then a second demonstration of this data structure to
organize a "mind map".

So with all of that, I think we could have a pretty good treatise on Data
Structures and Algorithms.

Next would be Automata theory.

Finally, I have an idea for a writing tool taht I could use to compose stories
with.
