7:29

Right now seems as good a time as any to do some super chill freewriting. The
first thing that I need to say is that I need to gather some sort of wrist rest
for my wrists. There is no way I will be able to write like this for an
extended period, so let us remedy this situation.

So now I have gotten two towels, and I have wrapped them up so that my wrists
actually rest above the actual keyboard.

I'm not sure how I like this. For one thing, I think the way that the hands
don't line up with the keys sometimes is somewhat disturbing.

I am still getting used to this keyboard, so I am not totally proficient at
weilding it.

So I want to do some practice. I want to take a passage, let's take it from
shakespeare, and I want to rehearse it a few times.

Let's take a monologue from King Lear. We will time ourselves how long it takes
to complete it.

7:36
They durst not do't.
They could not, would not do't: 'ts worse than murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage:
Resolve me, with all bedest haste, which way
Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
Coming from us.

Kent.
My lord, when at their home
I did commend your highness' letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
My Duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on those contens,
They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse;
Commanded me to follow and attend
The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Display'd so sacily against your highness,
Have more man than wit about me, drew;
He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.

3:16 177 words

I don't know what I just typed. It was a lot of words that I don't know what
they mean. I think, I don't want to learn how to spear shakesperean, because it
is nigh impossible to understand the words that he is saying.

Something interesting I find is that language evolves, and when language
evolves, the stories we tell must evolve also. The greeks, for instance, told
stories like the Iliad, and the Odyssey. Now, we must remember, these names are
simply the greek labels for the stories. This would be similar to saying that
our culture has stories like, "The Battle at Waterloo" or "Marco Polo's journey
to China".

Since, of course, it would be absurd to write these stories down and say,
"This, what I have just written down, is THE canonical version of the story,
and every other version that conflicts with this one is incorrect on the basis
that it conflicts with this one," we are not going to do that. Instead, what we
are going to do is write these stories down, and say, "This is a few versions
of the story that I have written. What do you think?"

By admitting to ourselves that mytholgical cannon is a little bit silly to talk
about, we can write and re-write stories however we see fit.

Of course, this can go to a complete extreme. We could re-write the Matrix
trilogy to be a fun family flick with some light hearted comedy thrown in the
mix occasionally. That would desecrate that movie and what it is trying to
represent, in my mind, and so we must caution ourselves against writing
something absurd.

But, I might find myself so inspired to write the Matrix Trilogy in some other
format. Most likely, I would just write an outline for the scenes that happen
in the three movies, and then I would write a single short story version, of
all three movies. A three act play, with exposition (where we are introduced to
the matrix, and taken out of it), rising action (The events of the first two
movies comibined, climaxing at the encounter with the source), and finally
concluding with a third act which resembles the good parts about the final
movie.

I could write all of this as one sort of short-story/novella. This is an idea
of something that I could write about. It would force me to extract out the
characters in a way that distills them down to their utmost essence. With names
like "Neo" "Morpheous" "Trinity" "Dozer" "Bane" and so forth, you can tell that
symbolism was most certainly intended by the writers of the work.

7:50

Let's practice something else. I want to pull up some dickens, and see how that
feels in typing it.

7:52

The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard suspected the
passengers, the passengers suspected one another and the guard, they all
suspected everybody else, and the coachman was sure of nothing but the horses;
as to which cattle he could with a clear conscience have taken his oath on the
two Testaments that they were not fit for the journey.

"Wo-ho!" said the coachman. "So, then! One more pull and you're at the top and
be damned to you, for I have had trouble enough to get you to it!--Joe!"

"Halloa!" the guard replied.

"What o'clock do you make it, Joe?"

"Ten minutes, good, past eleven."

"My blood!" ejaculated the vexed coachman, "and not atop of Shooter's yet! Tst!
Yah! Get on with you!"

The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decided negative, made a
decided scramble for it, and the three other hroses followed suit. Once more,
the Dover mail struggled on, and the jack-boots of its passengers squashing
along by its side. They had stoped when the coach stopped, and they kept close
company with it. If any one of the three had had the hardihood to propose to
another to walk on a little ahead into the mist and darkness, he would have put
himself in a fair way of getting shot instantly as a highwayman.

The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill. The horses stopped
to breathe again, and the guard got down to skid the wheel for the descent, and
open the coach-door to let the passengeres in.

"Tst! Joe!" Cried the coachman in a wearning voice, looking down from his box.

"What  do you say, Tom?"

They both listened.

"I say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe."

"_I_ say a horse at a gallop, Tom," returned the guard, leaving his hold of teh
door, and mounting nimbly to his place. "Gentlemen! In the king's name, all of
you!"

With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, and stood on the
offesnsize.

The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step, getting in; the
two other passengers were close behind him, and about to follow. He remained on
the step, half in the coach and half out of; they remained in the road below
him. They all looked from the coachman to the guard, and from the guard to the
coachman, and listened. The coachman looked back and ethe guard looked back,
and even the emphatic leader pricked up his ears and looked back, without
contradicting.

The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling and lobouring of the
coach, added to the stillness of the night, made it very quiet indeed. The
panting of the horses communicated a tremulous motion to the coach, as if it
were in a state of agitation. The hearts of the passengers beat loud enough
perhaps to be heard; but at any rate, the quiet pause was audibly expressive of
people out of breath, and holding the breath, and having the pulses quickened
by expectation.

The sound of a horse at a gollop came fast and furiously up the hill.

"So-ho!" the guard sang out, as loud as he could roar. "Yo there! Stand! I
shall fire!"

The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and floundering, a
man's voice called from the mist, "Is that the Dover mail?"

"Never you mind what it is!" the guard retorted. "What are you?"

"_Is_ that the Dover mail?"

"Why do you want to know?"

"I want a passenger, if it is."

"What passenger?"

"Mr. Jarvis Lorry."

One booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name. The guard, the
coachman, and the two other passengers eyed him distrustfully.

"Keep where you are," the guard called to the voice in the mist, "because, if I
should make a mistake, it could never be set right in your lifetime. Gentlemen
of the name of Lorry answer straight."

"What is the matter?" asked the passenger, then, with mildly quavering speech.
"Who wants me? Is it Jerry?"

("I don't like Jerry's voice, if it is Jerry," growled the guard to himself.
"He's hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.")

"Yes, Mr. Lorry."

"What is the matter?"

"A despatch sent after you from over yonder. T. and Co."

"I know this messenger, guard," said Mr. Lorry, getting down into the
road--assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by the other two
passengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach, shut the door, and pulled
up the window. "He may come close; there's nothing wrong."

"I hope there ain't, but I can't make so 'Nation sure of that," said the guard,
in gruff soliloquy. "Hallo you!"

"Well! And hallo you!" said Jerry, more hoarsely than before.

"Come on at a footpace! d'ye mind me? And if you've got holsters to that saddle
o' yourn, don't let me see you hand go night 'em. For I'm a devil at a quick
mistake, and when I make one it takes the form of Lead. So now let's look at
you."

The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddying mist, and came
to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood. The rider stooped, and,
casting up his eyes at the guard, handed the passenger a small folded paper.
The rider's horse was blown, and both horse and rider were covered with mud,
from the hoofs of the horse to the hat of the man.

"Guard!" said the passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.

The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raised blunderbuss,
his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman, answered curtly, "Sir."

"There is nothing to apprehand. I belong to Tellson's Bank. You must know
Tellson's Bank in London. I am going to Paris on business. A crown to drink. I
may read this?"

"If so be as you're quick, sir."

He opened it in the light of the ceach-slamp on that side, and read--first to
himself and then aloud: "'Wait at Dover for Mam-selle.' It's not long, you see,
guard. Jerry, say that my answer was, RECALLED TO LIFE."

Jerry started in his saddle. "That's a Blazing strange answer, too," said he,
at his hoarsest.

"Take that message back, and they will know that I received this, as well as if
I wrote. Make the best of your way. Good night."

With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in; not at all
assisted by his fellow-passengers, who had expeditiously secreted their watches
and purses in their boots, and were now making a general pretence of being
asleep. With no more definite purpose than to escape the hazard of originating
any other kind of action.

The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing round it as
it began the descent. The guard soon replaced his bludnerbuss in his arm-chest,
and, having looked to the rest of its contents, and having looked to the
supplementary pistols that he wore in his belt, looked to a smaller chest
benteath his seat, in which there were a few smith's tools, a couple of
torches, and a tinder-box. For he was furnished with that completness that if
the coach-lamps had been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally hapen,
he had only to shut himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks well off
teh straw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if he were luck) in
five minutes.

"Tom!" softly over the coach roof.

"Hallo, Joe."

"Did you hear the message?"

"I did, Joe."

"What did you make of it, Tom?"

"Nothing at all, Joe."

"That's a coincidence, too," the guard mused, "for I made the same of it
myself."

Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile, not only to
ease his spent horse, but to wipe th emud from his face, and shake the wet out
of his hat-brim, which might be capable of halding about half a gallon. After
standing with the bridle over his heavily-splashed arm, wuntill the wheels of
the mail  were no longer within hearing and the night was quite still again, he
turned to walk down the hill.

"After that there gollop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won't trust your
fore-legs till I get you on the level," said this hoarse messenger, glancing at
his mare. "'Recalled to life.' That's a Blazing strange message. Much of that
wouldn't do for you, Jerry! I say, Jerry! You'd be in a Blazing bad way, if
recalling to life was to come into fashion, Jerry!"

8:15 1444 words in 23 minutes. 62 words per minute.

I want to try someone else now, someone with fewer lavish sentences.

Sanderson

8:18

Elantris was beautiful, once. It was called the city of the gods: a place of
power, radiance, and magic. Visitors say that the very stones glowed with an
inner light, and that the city contained wondrous arcane marvels. At night,
Elantris shone like a great silvery fire, visible even from a great distance.

Yet, as mignificent as Elantris was, its inhabitants were more so. Their hair a
brilliant white, their skin an almost metallic silver, the Elantrians seemed to
shine like the city itself. Legends claim that they were immortal, or at least
nearly so. Their bodies healed quickly, and they were blessed with great
stregth, insight, and speed. They could perform magics with a bare wave of the
hand; men visited Elantris from all across Opelon to receive Elantrian
healings, food, or wisdom. They were divinities.

And anyone could become one.

The Shaod, it was called. The Transformation. It struck randomly-usually at
night, during the mysterious hourse when life slowed to rest. The Shaod could
take beggar, craftsman, nobleman, or warrior. Wheni t came, the fortunate
person's life ended and began anew; he would discard his old, mundane
existance, and move to Elantris. Elantris, where he could live in liss, rule in
wisdom, and be worshipped for eternity.

Enterity ended ten years ago.

8:21 214 words in 3 minutes. 70 wpm.

8:23

Price Raoden of Arelon awoke early that morning, completely unaware that he had
been damned for all eternity. Still drowsy, Raoden sat up, blinking in the soft
morning light. Just outside his open balcony windows he could see the enormous
city of Elantris in the distance, its stark walls casting a deep shadow over
the smaller city of Kae, where Raoden lived. Elantris's walls were incredibly
high, but Raoden could see the tops of black towers rising behind them, their
broken spires a clue to the fallen majesty hidden within.

The abondoned city seemed darker than usual. Raoden stared at it for a moment,
then glanced away. The huge Elantrian walls were impossible to ignore, but
people of Kae tried very hard to do just that. It was painful to remember the
city's beauty, to wonder how ten years ago the blessing of the Shaod had become
a curse instead...

Raoden shook hishead, climbing out of bed. It was unusually warm for such an
early hour; he didn't feel even a bit chilly as he threw on his robe, then
pulled the servant's cord beside his bed, indicating that he wanted breakfast.

That was another odd thing. He was hungry-very hungry. Almost ravenous. He had
never liked large breakfasts, but this morning he found himself waiting
impatiently for his meal to arrive. Finally, he decided to send someone to see
what was taking so long.

"Ien?" he called in the unlit chambers.

There was no response. Raoden frowned slightly at the Seon's absence. Where
could Ien be?

Raoden stood, and as he did, his eyes fell on Elantris again. Resting in the
great city's shadow, Kae seemed like an insignificant village by comparison.
Elantris. An enourmous, ebony block-not really a city anymore, just the corpse
of one. Raoden shivered slightly.

A knock came at his door.

"Finally," Raoden said, walking over to pull open the door. Old Elao stood
outside with a tray of fruit and warm bread.

The tray dropped to the ground with a crash, slipping from the stunned maid's
fingers even as Raoden reached out to accept it. Raoden froze, the tray's
metallic ring echoing through the silent morning hallway.

"Merciful Domi!" Elao whispered, her eyes horrified and her heand trembling as
she sreached up to grab the Korathi pendant at her neck.

Raoden reached out, but the maid took a quivering step away, stumbling on a
small melon in her hast to escape.

"What?" Raoden asked. Then he saw his hand. What had been hidden in the shadows
of his darkend room was now illuminated by the hallway's flickering lantern.

Raoden turned, throwing furniture out of his way as he stumbled to the tall
mirror at the side fo his chambers. The dawn's light had grown just strong
enough for him to see th ereflecteion that stared back at him. A stranger's
reflection.

His blue eyes were the same, though they were wide with terror. His hair,
however, had changed from sandy brown to limp gray. The skin was the worst. The
mirrored face was covered with sickly black patches, like dark bruises. The
splotches could mean only one thing.

The Shaod had come upon him.

8:31 530 words in 8 minutes 65 wpm.

Okay, I am done typing for right now, I think. I want to come back to myself
for a moment, and return to existance as a human being.

It is unfortunate that I feel happy when I am writing, but that it is so
exhausting. But such is life, I suppose.



