I want to try something.

[Enter Obi-wan upper stage: The stage is set in a factory on geonosis. General
Grevious is overseeing the production of a new round of droids.]

Grevious: I want these droids on time. Pray thee work quick,
Lest I grow impatient for your trials.

Droid: Yes sir, Roger Roger.

[Droid continues working on stage below.]

Grevious: Alas, when this droid army is complete
The dark lord will be very pleased. Now if
I can but get these droids to work quickly,
I can bring in a bonus to my salary.

[Obi-wan, overhearing Grevious' monologue, jumps from the catwalk to the floor
below]

Obi-wan [After landing]: I greet thee Salutations, my good friend!

Grevious: General Kenobi! Much boldness you have.
Droids, remove this man from my presence.

[Droids gather weapons and approach Kenobi. Kenobi takes a step back, and uses
the force to lower a beam from the rafters on to his targets.]

Obi-wan: Your droids are much to weak for me. You must
pursue with greater passion if you are to beat me.

Okay, so this is utterly ridiculous. As I was writing it, I was enjoying
myself, but as I read it back, I see that there is something quite missing from
it. It doesn't pack a punch when you read it. I don't think in syllables, and
attempting to think in waves of ten is difficult for me.

Thinking in verse at all is difficult for me, actually. I don't naturally parse
out the syllables of the words I say, and to do so is quite tiresome to me.

I much rather like having the idea of what is in my head remain in my head, and
then whatever words come out of that idea are the words that come out. To try
and filter the words by rhyme or syllable seems foolish to me.

So with that being said, I want to try again. This time I want to create a
prose rendition of the scene.

Obi-wan walked gently across the rafters of the planet of Genonsis, that he
just landed on. He was investigating the droid factory on that planet. General
Grevious was rumored to make a visit to this planet, and it was Obi-wan's job
to intercept him and defeat him.

Obi-wan scuttered along the catwalk. He observed as machines proceeded to
produce droids enmasse on assembly lines. All sorts of droids were being
constructed. However, his job was not to admire the machinary that the
geonosieans had put together, his job was to find and confront General
Grevious.

Obi-wan stopped for a moment, and gave himself pause. "Look with your mind, not
with your eyes." The words of his mentor Qui-Gon Ginn rang in his mind. Obi-wan
found a secluded area, paused for a moment, and lowered himself to his knees to
meditate.

At first, Obi-wan sensed his mind was wandering, that he was harboring
distractions. He cleared himself of those distractions, and began to think
through the plant. Using his power of vision in the force, Obi-wan was able to
clear the cloud of his knowledge, and feel the layout of the factory. He
understood where every hallway, and every entryway were.

Being able to see the layout, Obi-wan now began to observe the layout in his
minds eye, and attempt to find the room that he would most likely find General
Grevious.

Obi-wan sensed a large room that was along the catwalk he was on that would be
the most advantagous starting point for a search.

Having now cleared his mind and discovered the method of what he needed to do,
Obi-wan opened his eyes with new resolve, and began to make his way along the
catwalk to the large empty room that he had sensed with the force.

As Obi-wan got closer to the large room, he could feel the force of a living
creature acting in that room.

Obi-wan stopped advancing for a moment. That didn't make sense? How could he
feel a living creature when there shouldn't be a living creature other than
himself on this planet? Geonosis was a planet with insects and factories, not
living people.

Obi-wan proceeded again, this time with caution as he continued along the
catwalk to identify his living force signal.

Obi-wan made it to a door which opened to the large hanger room that he had
sensed in his visions. Obi-wan slowly opened the door, and peering in to the
room.

The room was large, as he had sense, but Obi-wan hadn't realized that this
room was also the main hanger bay. The room opened up to a large landing area,
which allowed shuttles to enter and exit as they pleased.

As Obi-wan inspected further, and locked his eyes on the force signal that he
was recieving, he saw immediately that it was General Grevious that he was
sensing in this room.

But that still didn't make any sense. Grevious was a droid, he should have a
living force signal.

Obi-wan decided that it wasn't prudent to dwell on it, and continued on with
his plan.

Obi-wan made his way along the catwalk above General Grevious, but on another
side of the hanger. Obi-wan had managed to sneak along this way without
alerting either Grevious or one of his guards.

Just before he jumped, Obi-wan sensed his force vision one last time. He was
certain that he felt life signals coming from Grevious, but he was still unable
to make sense of why that might be.

But now again was not the time to dwell on it. Obi-wan jumped off of the
catwalk and on to the floor below.

"Hello There." Obi-wan greeted Grevious.

"General Kenobi." Grevious replied as he turned to face Kenobi. Grevious was
wearing a cape containing his stolen lightsabers, and it swung with Grevious
as he turned for dramatic effect. "You are a bold one. Guards, Kill him."

With that order, the four armed guards that were protecting grevious with two
sided javelins assumed an advance position, and began work towards surrounding
Kenobi.

Kenobi, recognizing this pattern, took a step back from the four, and began to
reach for the force. Kenobi was able to find a boiling hot exhaust vent and
attumne himself to it. From this, he was able to follow it to a large
air-filtration device that was anchored above the four guards. Using the powers
of his force action, he was able to sever the connection of the large
filtration unit and the brace that was holding it, causing it to fall abruptly.

Obi-wan was able to then push with extended effort downwardly on the unit, and
it fell very quickly, smashing the four guards. One of the guards was not
entirely crushed by this action by Obi-wan, so with one smooth motion, Kenobi
behaeded the remaining guard and sliced off it's arms as he made his way
towards Grevious.

"Grevious, it's so great to see you again. How have you been?" Kenobi began
making playful small talk.

"I have been trained in your jedi arts." Grevious began to remove his cape and
draw his lightsabers. "You will not get the best of me this time, Kenobi. You
are in a trap deeper than you know."

Obi-wan, lightsaber still drawn, assumed a battle position and prepared to face
Grevious.

Grevious ignited the four lightsabers one at a time. There were three green
lightsabers, and one blue one, in Grevious' four arms. 
