So last night I had a dream. This dream had a couple parts.

So the first part of the dream, I was on vacation with my family. I remember
there was skiing involved.

After we were done there, we then went to Chuck and Michelles. Or rather, the
dream version of Chuck and Michelle's house. While going there, I remember
wanting to fall asleep.

At this point, I remember going in and out of wakefullness, and constantly
adjusting my position for "optimal sleeping". That meant putting my bottom
arm around my head so that it was tucked nicely in the blanket.

In the dream, when we arrive at Chuck and Michelles, I wake up, and we're
already in the middle of activities. I look at the time, and deterimine that I
have been sleeping for 20 hours. I think little of it beyond, "I needed the
sleep" and join in with conversation for some time. Mostly, I remember my mom
talking with Michelle in the living room.

After a bit of that, I go back up to Jaq's old room, and I find a corner and go
to sleep.

I wake up and see that the time is 1 o'clock, and we are preparing to leave. My
mom didn't want to wake me, but as I wake up, I start to come to and recognize
what's going on. I go into the bathroom, and realize that I slept for another
20 hours straight, again, and I say, "Wow, it's been a while since I had a 20
hour night, and now I've had two in a row. That's awesome!"

Anyway, as the dream continues, we end up going to the next destination, which
is a competition. At this competition, there are pools, and the competition is
yet to be started.

I am walking around, and Collin is there, and we're just kabitzing waiting for
the competitions to start. As we are waiting, I decide that I need to go to the
bathroom.

I walk across, and on my left there is a pool, and on the right, and below,
there is another pool. I get to the bathroom, which is across these two pools,
and I get ready to go in. But before I do, I adjust all of my belongings. I
take them off, and put them aside. I also tie up my shoes.

As I'm coming out of the restroom (I don't remember going in at all) I
recognize that I am now barefoot. I curse myself, because I must have taken off
my shoes out of habit, and now I had to put them on again. Also, I realize that
competition has started, and that I need to be on the other side. So I hastily
tie up my shoes, and I start to carry my things and put them in my pockets as I
run across these two pools again.

As I am running across, I put my wallet and my keys in my pockets, but as I am
putting my phone in my pocket, the water between the pools starts to rise, and
I start to fall and be taken away into the lower pool.

In the lower pool, two people are competing. One of them is bigger than the
other, like, father and son aged, the son being late teens/early twenties. The
competition is a swimming competition, where it's a race to get to 100 m, but
during the race you are able to fight and hold back your opponent. The two are
going at it, and the son is trying to just swim fast, but the father is
constantly messing with him.

So as I'm falling into the competition ring, a few things go through my mind.
First, I don't want to disrupt the competition, and I notice that where I am
falling is away enough from the people that it won't disrupt them. Second, I
don't want my phone to get wet. I have it in my left hand, and I was in the
middle of putting it in my pocket when I started falling. So I grab the phone
in my right hand, (the side that is further than the water since I am falling
to my left) and I throw it as far as I can, hopefully so taht it will land on
the opposite side of the pool.

The phone gets pretty far, but it lands on the step just short of the end of
the pool. Collin grabs it out of the water, and begins to dry it off. I swim
towards the edge away from the competitors, and make my way out. When I get
out, Collin hands me the phone, and I do my best to see if it is still working.
Sure enough, it is still working, but I'm still wary of the fact that I got it
wet.

That was the extent of the dream that I remember.

I also do want to note that I did need to pee quite bad, and the going to the
restroom certainly was an indicator of that.
