So today is April First, which marks the month a year ago that I was arrested.
On the one hand, it feels as though I have been through a great tribulation,
and on the other hand, I can't help but feel that this was something of a
hiccup in an otherwise productive and fruitful mode of living from this point
forward.

I have come to appreciate a much better balance of how I manage my time and
energy, and my outlook towards my life is mostly positive. It's amazing how
much a shift in perspective and a balance of neurochemicals can change how I
perceive the world.

I have written over 1400 lines so far on the fifth draft of my Seth and Cain
story, and I still have yet to finish the story. I have one more section to
write for it, and once that is done, it will be complete. I am happy with how
it is turning out so far, and for this draft I have done some active editting
in order to get myself back in to the flow of writing it.

I am hoping to in the end chop this thing down to something like 10 to 12
thousand words so that it can be read within minutes, but that might not be the
case. Either way, it's a start.

I am considering starting a blog. I want to write entires in the blog on a
semi-consistent basis. I think preparing for a submission every other week
would be a good starting point. What I could do is write the blog, and have
some articles ready for some backlog. Then, when I have a good three months or
so of backlog, I can get started on getting the thing going.

It would be an interesting exercise in concientiousness if I were to partake in
something like that. I would have to require myself to produce content
regularly. I think a good introduction to the blog would be something like my
Seth and Cain work. It is composed in six sections, so I could publish
concurrently with something else. So for instance, the reader could, every two
weeks, get an entry in that story, along with a random writing prompt that I
practiced for. Or something like that. And if the backlog is great enough, I
could not only post up my drafts, but I could keep the drafts for some time
after they are completed, and return to them the week before they are to be
sent.

It's an interesting idea, but I am not sure how much I intend to follow through
with it. I like the idea of becoming a blogger, but to be totally fair, I'm not
sure if something so rigid as a "weekly release schedule" is something I want
to subject myself to.

All of that being said, it is something that I really want to get together, and
the idea of getting good at creating diagrams and drawings and things of that
nature excites me as well. If I had a hobby for photography, I would include
things like that in it as well, but I don't, so so be it.


