So right now it is something like 8:21 in the morning on a Friday. I am
currently planning on leaving in less than three hours to go to my apartment,
and subsequently proceed to practice bjj.

I feel as though I have gotten a good amount of sleep last night. I do not
remember precisely when I began to lie down, but I know that when I woke up,
that it was a long, dreamless sleep, and that it lasted for something five rem
cycles straight. So that was good.

I just took two sneezes. That felt good.

I am listening to a playlist called

[Relaxing Final Fantasy VIII Music](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWvn258lwp0)

I am currently something like four minutes in. I believe the first track of the
playlist of this video just finished, and we are on to the next one.

I like these sorts of compilations, because while I love the whole original
soundtrack, I think having these compilations puts the tracks in a fresh order,
allowing me to recognize what is going on in the music (because I have listened
to the tracks before, of course) but still gives something fresh when I come to
decide how I like the ordering and mixing of the tracks.

I am having a difficult time getting in to free writing right now, and I'm not
sure why. Maybe it's because I feel jumpy for some reason. I'm not sure. I feel
as though I have to look at something else when I type, or else something
terrible will happen to me.

I have tea and water next to me, as well as some snack bars and oranges, so I
am set as far as that is concerned.
