# Stream of Consciousness
So right now it is a Tuesday in April, nine days in to the month, and I am to
the point now where I have a few things that I need to get done.

The first thing to mention is that I am at work right now, and I am doing this
stream of consciousness typing from my desk there. If someone comes up, I might
have to alt-tab in to something else.

Something else to mention is that I am listening, at this very second, to a new
mix on youtube that I have not heard before. It's called something like, "Piano
music for study or sleep." Which to me seems like something of an okymoron, but
I'll go with it, and see what it has in store. So far, the first piece of the
playlist was reasonable enough, just your typical pop piano work. For the time
being, I'll leave it on, because it gives something like sufficient white noise
for me to work and write like this.

Another thing on my mind is that I am nearing the completion of my first full
draft of the acceptable version of the Seth and Cain story. It's gotten to the
point now where I really just want to sit down and write out everything else
that needs to be done, but I know that in order to get it to a point where I
would consider it publishable (ha! as if) it would take a lot more work as far
as editting and polishing the words is concerned.

That work wouldn't be too difficult, but just time-consuming and tedious.

The thing is, I'm almost to that point, and I really want to start working on
those aspects of this work, but I still have yet to write the end of part five,
the end of part six, or the epilogue, so I think it would be safe to say that
it's not quite ready to be put in to that phase yet. Still though, I want it to
be there, and I am to the point that no matter how un-inspired I may feel about
writing original dialogue to complete the piece, I am about ready to just bring
myself to that point so that I can have the complete alpha version of the work
complete and ready to edit.

Besides the Seth and Cain story, I have, of course, other work that needs to
get done. Firstly, the build for April is coming along nicely, and it's due to
be completed by the end of the week. So that gives me something like 32 hours
to work on the build. I am currently working on a four hour case, and I'm
hoping to, at some point, knock out a few cases in one day. For right now,
though, I think it would just be awesome if I could get this four hour case
behind me, so that I can move on to other things (like maybe writing the ending
to my Seth and Cain story)

I also want to mention something about how I slept last night. So I did not
have dreams last night, but I certainly had feelings in my sleep. I spent a
good six to seven hours asleep after the SC2 match I had on youtube concluded.
When I woke up around two or three o'clock, I moved to the chair, and attempted
to sleep sitting up in that. This worked for about an hour or so, when I
tumbled out of the chair and decided to resume sleeping on the floor. When I
made this decision, it was still dark outside, and I decided to move back in to
the bedroom.

I slept again like this for another three hours. During this three hours, I
thought about every potential sleeping position. By the time I woke up around
7:15, I was facing North-West IRL, and every five minutes or so I would adjust
my sleeping position to turn myself some number of degrees clockwise. I then
began to reason that it made no sense waking up until I had gotten through all
of the positions of rotational symetry I could get together. So I spent another
forty five or so minutes rotating in a circle as I continued to daze in and out
of waking consciousness.

I had the watch with me, so I was well aware of the fact that the time was
slipping past eight am. I didn't care. Laying down there felt too good.

At around eight, though, I reasoned that I was about sixty percent through the
full rotation, and I would just have to live with the fact that I was missing
that forty percent out of my life.

It was funny, because as I was driving to work this morning (so something like
fifty minutes ago from the time I am writing this) I was thinking to myself, "I
think that's about the perfect representation of everything that is misaligned
in my life right now. I have an idea, but I'm not able to complete it, and then
I'm forced to move along a different path in life." In some sense, this event
(not really a dream but illogical like a dream) expressed perfectly the
disconnect between my transcendent reality and the reality that I live in.
There is about sixty percent of my life that is in line with my psychological
drives, and about forty percent of my life that must be accomodated for.

So I think that about touches on all of the things that are on my mind in this
moment. I could go on about something else, but I don't really have the brain
power to do that right now. Or, I could say more aptly, I am still upset that I
had to disrupt my sleeping cycle in order to make my way in to work.

Oh, I need to call my lawyer as well. I just needed to throw that in there.

I also just want to mention that the piano mix I was playing earlier was all
right, but it was just a single piece of music played over and over for eighty
minutes or however long. So I got exhausted of that for the time, and turned it
off. I am now listening to an EDM mix.

I need to work on my actual work now. The biggest thing for this four hour case
that I am working on is actually getting data that does what I want it to. But
once I get that, it should be okay.

--

It is now approaching eleven in the morning, just before noon, and I have
elected to visit BJJ for lunch today. I am leaving now, heading to my
apartment, and then heading to the school. I just wanted to write this here
becasue I just finished with typeracer, and I want to get back to writing my
own words again.

--

Okay, so I am back from BJJ and I really want to type in my own words again.

I have had many dreams while I was away, and I must say that the result of
those dreams has been something unpleasent for the most part in the past few
hours.

I have had dreams of demons, as if the Lord of Darkness himself is coming up
from the grave and is attempting to consume everything, and the thing is, with
this dream, I feel as though I am the part of myself which is attempting to
bring forth the Lord of Darkness so that he may have the best coming that he
may on this good green planet earth.

Of course, these are only dreams, but I am of the impression that I am somehow
experiencing this darkness inside of myself right now. When my dreams are
inturrupted, this is the sorts of images that I see when I leave myself to my
own devices. It's particularly troubling, and it titilates my anxiety in the
strangest of ways in my waking moments.

Of course, when I look deeply at these demons, I must have some sort of
correltation to the place that they originated from. I have, of course, already
placed out the things on my todo list, and I have since learned more about my
mother and my lawyer, so I should get that going in the near future.

It's interesting, in this moment now, to think about how I am nearly finished
with my Seth and Cain dialouge, but one, I can't bring myself to finish it, and
two, I would much rather write about something entirely different for hours on
end then touch another word of that story. It's unfortunate, but I will have to
toil through this remaining bit if that story is to ever come to life.

Of course, since I am writing like this right now, I am to the point where I
have things in my head that I want to say, but I am too stuck or too bogged
down with the things and responsibilities of my life that I can't properly let
this particular train of consciouness come out of me.

So it's interesting here, because I think I am to the point where I want to
re-write the story of revelation, but I am in a predicament because Revelation
is something of a beast of a story, and I have no idea of two things, either
how I want to approach it, or even how the story goes for real. So I could make
up a "Ragnarok" story, but I think it is safe to say that my ragnarok story
would be much unlike the revelation one.

It's always so interesting, when I am typing these things out, because it seems
that this is the most surefire way to get someone at work to ask me a question
about something. I have just been asked a question by Ruel, and I very much do
not want to deal with anything problems that he has right now at all. It is
quite frankly the last thing that I could conceive of doing, and if I have to
do it then so be it. But for the love of God, can a man just get some time to
sit down in peace and write in his journal for a time? Is that too much to ask
for?

I don't remember who it was that said it, but it was someone of the past that
said that all of man's problems stemmed from the fact the a human being isn't
able to sit alone in a quiet room for more than a few minutes without going
insane. I am quite inclined to think this is true. After all, what more could
we need? We have a society that runs, I say let it run. Suppose I could
overcome that desire in myself to destroy things when I am told to sit still in
a room alone by myself. Suppose I could train myself to sit still for hours on
end, without food or entertainment, and I could do so peacefully, without
turmoil. Suppose I could do that. Would this solve my problems?

I would say that it could certainly help in solving a lot of them. The thing
about it is, when you are in a room by yourself, the thing that will cause you
to destroy something, at least for me where I am right now, is the projection
of your anxiety. That sounds like a strange thing to say on the surface, but
when we dig a little deeper in to it, we will see that it actually makes a lot
of sense.

In order to make sense of this, we must first talk about what I mean when I say
the word "Anxiety". When I use the word anxiety, what I am refering to is that
part of myself which is anxious of the things that might happen in the future.
What seperates an anxiety from a premonition is that an anxiety is not
"looking in" to the future and attempting to determine what might or might not
happen from a bystanders perspective, but instead, anxiety takes a more hands
on approach, and attempts to get the subject to feel in the moment thing that
the anxiety is worried about.

This is the purpose of anxiety dreams. An anxiety dream (dreams of falling, of
being chased, of being naked and unable to find clothing, of drowning) is
brought about because there is a part of the individual that is concerned that
the dreamer will be subjected to these problems in the future, and the anxiety
is rather concerned with making sure that we know how to handle it if we do.

--

This is what I am talking about. I had a train of thought, but it got
inturrupted multiple times throughout the day by various distractions.
Forturately now, I have talked with my lawyer, and also my mother, about the
state of things regarding the cases. That was something that I knew needed to
happen, but wasn't happening.

I was talking about anxiety, and the forms it takes, but I think it's best to
just ignore that for now and talk about something else.

You see, right now, I am thinking about something else entirely. It's something
ethereal, something ephemeral, something I want to reach but I can't. It's
something that I keep striving for but can't quite touch.

You see, when I find my train of consciounsness, I find that many times what
occupies it is not something like a voice line, or a train of thought, but
instead it becomes an image of some sort, like a movie, but a movie that I have
the remote control for. Everything becomes something like a living, breathing,
psychedelic vision, and while I can focus on that vision and make it very
detailed and intricate, attempting to write it down in any way proves to be an
exercise in futility.

So with that being said, as much as I would like to speak out my train of
thought right now, it is quite difficult to do when I would much rather be able
to draw and animate my train of thought in real time. Any words I use to
describe it will be neccesarily inadequeate in fully capturing my essence, but
the better I become at art, and at practicing art, the better I become at
capturing that train of thought.

But even in that sense, the sort of art that would fully reveal my train of
thought would only reveal it for a brief moment. In other words, the amount of
time it takes to reveal a psychedelic image in it's full form on to a piece of
paper (or much worse, in an animation) would be so much longer than the extent
of the life time of that train of thought. In other words, the amount of time
it takes to render a train of thought is so much longer than the amount of time
it takes to think a train of thought that it becomes a great exercise in focus
and in patience to take a single thought, or a singel strand of thought, and to
distillate and tesselate it in to a solitary piece of art.

So, all of that being said, I am mostly continuing to write here because I want
to get more proficient at thinking particular words and getting them out on my
fingers in a realtively painless way. I like ta have a certain level of
precision with my fingers so that I can have most of the words I type come out
spelled correctly, and when that is done, I can get in to a rythym that allows
me to gesticulate the whatever infathomable words I want, and I am able to
ejaculate them on the page with indeterminable precision. It becomes something
of a sexually provocative invocation of the inextricable loneliness that all of
us feels in the times of the greatest dire. In writing gibberish sentences like
this, I feel as though I am expanding the way that my mind thinks about
writing. I am forcing myself to think and articulate myself outside of my usual
bounds, and by doing so, I am forcing my brain to carve out pathways along
those paths as I continue to write out what I am thinking.

What I am thinking right this very moment is that I have spent considerable
time now talking about this sort of nonsense, and while it is instructive when
it comes to becoming a better writer, it is not constructive towards getting my
work done. So I think I am done writing out my raw train of consciousness, and
I believe I am ready to get back to work, at least for the time being.

I will probably come back to my Seth and Cain story at some point. I will
probably return to this free writing session, and I will use it to slingshot
myself in to the last part of the story. We will get there, I promise, but
right now is not the time.



