So last night I had a couple of dreams. They were mostly fragments. In fact,
they were almost entirely fragments now that I think about it.

So the first dream was about Neural Networks. Yesterday, towards the evening, I
hopped on Discord, and talked with Kyle and Evan about various AI things, and
the topic of Neural Networks came up, and we all mentioned that we have seen
the topic is passing, but never really decided to dive into it.

Well, I started to dive into it last night. I looked up what a Neural Network
is, and I started watching some videos and reading resources to educate myself
on how they worked.

So the dream was essentially this. There was a girl, and she had teeth, and she
wanted to place all of her teeth into certain recepticles. She was using Neural
Network to decide which recepticles to place them in. It turns out that in this
particular problem, the answer was entirely black and white, but the network
had a problem where, when she had five teeth to put into recepticles, the
network would tell her to put three of the teeth into a particlar recepticle,
and then it would leave off the other to. As I started looking in to it, I
decided to put some code into the network that if the rest of the answer were
so obvious that the network was simply leaving it off, then it should duplicate
the answer for the remaining teeth. Once I did this, the network was complete
with it's Black and White answer.

The second dream was very short. Essentially, I woke up and checked my email,
and I got a few emails from Iona, the penpal that I wrote to yesterday. The
email in the subject said, "Great message with promise of more to come." And
then, in the body she said, "So actually, my name is Vicka, not Iona, that's an
alias I use on the internet." It then continued to say, "Wow, that's one hell
of a first email, I feel like this is the start of a really valuble
relationship." She then said that I should follow her on some social media
site (it was a social media site that I haven't heard of because it doesn't
exist irl). I then got another email from her that was like, "omg, the email
didn't send something." I forget what the something was, but it was some sort
of picture. I had four total emails in my inbox.

I woke up soon after having this part of the dream, and I immediately was like
"That was a dream, I don't have emails, and her name isn't Vicka, it's Iona."
