So last night I did some active imagination work. It's hard to say exactly what
came out of it, but I feel as though I made some good progress towards
understanding my psyche.

Something I want to say is, I think meditating should be focused on achieving
tasks such as "imagine yourself as a stomach looking up at your eyes" as many
times as you can in the time. I like this approach for two reasons.

The first is that I can see a clear coorelation between being able to do
something like this as you wish, and being able to flex your brain muscles in a
certain way on demand. It reminds me of mental squats in a sense. Sure, the
exact motion of the squat is something you will never be demanded of, but it
has the utility to apply to many kinds of strength based movements.

So that being said, I tried it for some time, and I would say I was fairly
successful in attempting to maintain that state of awareness of where "I" was.
I was definitely pretty honest with myself about when I was tricking myself
into thinking that I was in that state, and when I recognized that my mind was
playing tricks on me, I recovered as gracefully as I could.

The second thing I like about this kind of meditation is that it's usually
pretty sharp and clear when you are doing it right. If you are doing it right,
you will actually feel like a stomach looking up at a head, but when you are
not doing it right, you will be able to, with an elementary level of focus, be
aware of that, and resume on the task of attempting to go back to the state of
awareness.

The last thing that I want to say about this sort of meditation that I like
about it is that it requires you to backtrace your thought processes. In other
words, when you enter in to the meditative state of feeling like a being inside
of a stomach that is looking out of the eyes as if through a periscope, and you
are able to maintain that way of thinking genuinely for six or more seconds,
and then you "fall out" of that way of thought, you then have to go back and
ask yourself what thought process led to you falling out of the train of
thought, and that requires you to trace back on thoughts that you maybe
originally had no idea were happening.

As another thing that I like about this style of meditation is that it's
clearly exhausting, and not for the reason that Vissassipana is exhausting.
Vissassipana is exhausting because thinking about the breathe is super boring,
and so the brain generates all sorts of aches and pains associated with your
sitting position and brings up anxieties of things that you haven't dealt with
in order to try and "snap you out of it" in some sense. So vissassipana is
exhausting in the sense that you are constanly fighting off the urge to just
sit up and walk away from the chair.

This sort of meditation is exhausting for a different reason. It's exhausting
because conjuring your brain to see itself in a certain way is mentally tiring.
If Vissassipana is running, then this style of meditation would be more akin to
lifting. Actually, it would be more like bodyweight lifting. Being asked to do
100 pullups is exhausting in a way that running a mile is not, and vice versa.
They are both exhausting, but in different ways.

It's interesting how I just made this analogy as well. It seems to me that,
when I run, I am thinking for the most point about things like my posture, my
stride, my breath, and so forth. I'm thinking about these things in a way to
allow myself to ensure that I am getting the most full and deep breaths that I
can, and also to ensure that I am running in a way that won't hurt me the next
morning.

The sort of "meditative trance" that I go in to when running is much like a
vissassipana session.

When doing pullups, on the other hand, I do still think about the breath, but
more so I am thinking about imagining my "essence" or "being" as being
something that is outside of space, and this "being" is able to "bend" space
in certain way so that my muscles will flex and contract in a specific manner.
So in that, the meditative trance that I fall in to when doing pullups is
similar to the meditattive trance that I fall in to when doing this second
style of meditation.

So with that all being said, I don't know if there is much more to say on that
front.

--

So I have had an idea about another one of my ideas about writing mathematical
things that everyone should know. That thing is Data Structures. I'll start
with a Linked List, followed by an Array List, into sort algorithms, into
things like heaps, hashtables, and discrete sets.

The first thing to do for such an article would be to first outline the most
essential findings in a sort of Outline, or Abstract, of the whole thing. Then,
there would be something like the "main course" of Data Structures, detailing
what happens at a high level, hitting all of the key findings, as a main
article. Then, there will be a list of addendums, each addendum being an
elaboration on a result gained, with more details about what everything means,
with a satisfactory argument giving an intuitive understanding about how this
addendum is important to the overall whole of the subject.

I think, any sort of course on Data Structures will have to begin by talking
about lists. We could even go so far back as to talk about things like arrays
and such. If we want to go super low level, we could even talk about how
something like ram is accessed at the assembelly level.

But beyond that, we takes some object like an array as a given, and we then
talk about things like how to construct an ArrayList from an Array.

From there, we would define the methods that act on the ArrayList. For
instance, Add, Remove, Retrieve, as well as whatever internal methods are
useful for performing those jobs.

From there, we could talk about a semantically equivilent, but computationally
less efficient (generally speaking) kind of list, that being the LinkedList. We
could quickly implement the same methods in as an ArrayList, and show that
certain opeartions for a linked list are slow in comparison to the ArrayList
operations, and teh downsides of teh ArrayList are vastly overshadowed by the
inefficiency of the LinkedList. However, I like the LinkedList, because it
introduces us to the idea of what I call Class -> Object Recursion. That is,
when a Class has, as one of it's members, an object, the type of this object
being the class itself.

From there, the next article could go in to this would be sorting algorithms.
We would talk about in place sorting algorithms, and then out of place sorting
algorithms. This gives us a place to talk about heaps, and introduce us to the
out of place, "Heap Sort". We can also talk about the recursive definition of
Quicksort that has only three lines of code.

Next, I'd want to talk about dictionaries, what they are useful for, and why
they should be used. Also, a note here about the dangers of associated arrays.
Hashtables should be useful here also.

Lastly, I think the final thing to talk about in data structures and algorithms
would be firstly, the maze generation algorithm provided by the Discrete Set
data structure, and then a second demonstration of this data structure to
organize a "mind map".

So with all of that, I think we could have a pretty good treatise on Data
Structures and Algorithms.

Next would be Automata theory.

Finally, I have an idea for a writing tool taht I could use to compose stories
with.

With that being said, I want to try something. I want to try writing out about
a whole topic, detailing everything I know about the topic. I don't know what
that topic is yet.

That is the thing, is that when I write like this, I never know what topic it
is taht I want to write on.

So for right now, I will write on my latest idea, which is the addition, or
perhaps remodelling, of the lit analyzer.

So the first thing that got me to thinking about this was in thinking about
things in terms of three by five cards that you could post on a story board. So
at some level, there is going to be a base node, and a leaf node, where the
base node is the very root of all of the things, the node that every node
points back to, and then a leaf node is a node that has no other nodes that
point to it.

In this way, you have something like a node/leaf structrue to add to your
stories.

Now, this is particularly helpful when creating something like a mind chart of
all of the scenes. You see, when you write scenes in a story, there are
multiple ways to do it, but ideally, your scenes would have some overlap (of
course, unless you are doing something radical, the characters at the beginning
of the work should be at least relevent to the characters at the end of the
work) but they would each have their own uniqueness to them.

In essence, though, without thinking at all about this tree view of things, we
can instead only think in terms of what a leaf node would look like. A leaf
node would be some text, along with whatever other information about the node
could be relevent. For instance, characters could be relevent, places could be
relevent, mood of the scene, style of the scene (action / dialogue / exposition
/ etc), and so forth.

The main goal of what I want this project to be would be this.

I want to be able to take an excerpt from something that I have written. I take
an excerpt, and I place metadata around it, and I ship it to my program. What
the program does is then take all of these nodes, and it will place them into
these abstract three by five cards, and based upon that, I will be able to
create story boards.

As far as having multiple versions of the same excerpt, but with different
metadata, I am thinking about having the metadata be a function from some input
space to the excerpt you are looking for.
