So today is a thursay, which means I am going to talk with Nick. I am going to
tell him that I would like a week off. I'll wait until the March build is
released, and then I will work on performance matters until that is done. When
I get that to a point where it's "tester" ready, I want to take a week off from
there.

Beyond that there is not much to say. It is early in the morning, as in, six
thirty time, and that's trippin me out a little bit. I just woke up and started
writing. I don't even remember what time is, it's that early in the morning. My
concept of time is entirely changed from how I understand it in the afternoon.
And not just, the number. I mean, the degree to which I understand exactly what
something like "time" means changes, depending on my mood. When I'm tired,
which is usually in the morning, time is something of a moveable esseence. It
doesn't really exist, and you can slide it around how you like.

This, by the way, is how I am able to sleep without an alarm clock. That is the
best move I have made.

So when I'm tired, or sleeping, I have an internal timer, but instead of
understanding time as "a series of digits" (which is usually how I think of
time in the real world), I understand time as a sort of spectrum, or continuim,
where, at every point on the continuim, there is something of an emotion, or a
feeling, or a color, or an image, associated with that. From the top, it's low
resolution, and you can portray the numbers 1,2,3,4, etc on top of it, but when
you really look down deep in to what is going with time, that is, the way that
I feel how time actually is when I am sleeping, is that time is something of an
essence, and we can tap in to that essence, and understand that the numbers
that we call the time are merely a construction of our own imaginations.

This realization, (and I just had this realization for a moment) could be an
object of meditation. For instance, I could do it again. Time is more than just
the numbers 1, 2, 3, etc. Time is something like an essence. You can dip in to,
and attempt to understand the essence, and by understanding the essence, you
never have to resort to using any sort of number system to describe time.

Now, you see time in this way.

Switch to seeing time in the first way, that is, imagine time as a long number
line, where "now" is at 0, and the future is positive numbers and the past is
negative numbers.

What does now mean? In the first, it simply means "the standstill moment of
time which was three hundred and thirty six seconds after the first event. This
works well for a lot of reasons. Firstly, it's by this system that we are able
to organize train routes, even amongst different time zones. So before we knock
it, let's take a moment to appreciate just how useful of a representation of
time this is.

Okay, now lets switch back to our night time, dream time, view of what time
means.

Time means something of a continumuumm, along which we are a part of, but we
are able to "zoom out" of the continuum and focus on it.

This "zooming out" is possible because this is the designated time of night
that everyone has to deal with.

So zooming out of this spectrum gives us a time period from whenever I fall
asleep (say 10 pm) and whenever I wake up (say 7). That nine hours is mine,
free to use however I want. Or rather, free for my dream self to use however he
wants.

It's interesting that I use the terms "Dream Self" and "Day Self" here. I think
Sam Harris would probably have a word with me about "the illusion of self" but
I think in this case, it is appropiate. I am like a schizophrenic man vividly
observing his hallucinations. A psychologist might tell that man, "Sir, these
images are just hallucinations, they are not real." In an attempt to try and
help the psychologist understand exactly what it is they are going through, the
man writes out his hallucinations in great detail. He talks about how he has
created, in his mind, a medeival kingdom, and the only way he knows about this
kingdom is from the messenger called "Hermes" that lives in his head. So the
man listens to Hermes, and details all that Hermes had to say.

Then, at some point, just before the psychotic break, the man said taht Hermes
told him that he was going to take him to the promised land, and that
everything was going to be all right, and it was going to be beautiful.

But the schizophrenic man attempted to describe his hallucinations, and how
real they felt to him. He did it in a way thta no one had done before, actually
detailing out the trains of thought which led him to think that what he was
doing was rational behavior, and of course, since the schizophrenic is
sometimes actually quite highly rational, it can be very hard to untangle what
he has to say.

But, if the patient is indeed, "Spectacularly Rational" (a coinage that I have
been accused of) then he ought to be able to describe in great detail with such
compelling story telling the nature of his own dreams. Or whatever other
hallucinations occur for the man. He could write it all out, in a rational way,
and it could be studied and analyzed for it's patterns.

Indeed, theremight not even be any flaws in teh thinking of teh man. Instead,
the man must be shown a path, which may be down trhough a valley, from the
peak he is standing on to the mountain he could be standing on, and if the man
is shown that path, and the man himself decides that he would like to step on
this path, then he will be able to traverse it (in time) and reach a point of
new beginnings.

This path can be found in the deepest and most compelling (but also probably
most obscure) dream content. This path can be found in the content that leaves
the dreamer awake, wishing to return to sleep to try and return to the dream.

Usually what happens for me is, I have a "sleeper dream" where I dream of
something insignificant, like bowling, or a game of golf. I will have a dream
about these things, and when I wake up, that will be what I remember. The
important thing is not to give much weight to these dreams, and instead return
t othe dream that you had before, returning to the dream, that was first latent
content in your subconscious as all dreams are, and taking that dream and
replaying it in your minds eye.

When I do this, I like to do something of a video editor trick. I take a few
points on the dream, and I mark them. I say, "This happened, then that
happneed, thensomething else happened, and then the last thing happened before
I woke up. When I've played through it in my mind a couple of times, I remember
it, and sometimes I can even skip to each keypoint in my head, and see
something like a "dream track" in my head.

With the dream now sufficiently packed around a mental structure, it is ready
to be stored for a bit of time and returned to concsciousness shortly after, so
that it can be written down into a more tangible meduim.

By the time I am writing things down for the dream, it has usually only been an
hour or two, and I am replaying the dream in my head as I write out the words.

I have gotten rather proficient at the dvorak layout, and I am much more
comfortable writing out my dreams in this way rather than with a pen and paper.
Pen and paper is nice sometimes, but not always. It can be cumbersome at times.
And with something like dreams, I want to just get all of it out there with as
many details as I can get, and then save it away and never think abotu it
again, until I read, or if it was so compelling I remember it naturally.

In fact, there are sometimes those dreams. I will wake up sometimes, and have a
dream that is so compelling that I spend literally the entire day just thinking
about that dream. In those cases, I usually speak out teh dream, which takes
something like twenty minutes in the middle of the night, and then I will go
back to sleep. When I go back to sleep, I usually have another dream before I
wake up for real. I will remember this dream as best I am able, and many times,
in this second dream, there will be some sort of link to the first dream.

I think this happens naturally. Of course, the way dreaming works, it takes
content from your subconscious and tries to back trace it through a thought
process. Some of the content it is able to create a coherent link from the
subconscious content all the way to a conscious memory. When this happens, the
dream is full aware what a subconscious element "means" to him.

It is more interesting in the cases where the dreamer is not sure what the
subconscious element means. In these cases, the dreamer must use the powers of
his conscious mind to attempt to reach down into his subconscious world. The
dream is where these two world collide. Or rather, the dream is the unconscious
made conscious, and thinking is the practice of making the conscious
unconscious, so the two practices together allow the dreamer to have a much
closer approximation of what he sees in his dreams, which is the closest thing
to the "raw information" of his unconscious memory.

Being equiped with this, the dreamer starts to discover themes and motifs that
stay constant throughout many dreams. At some point I will have to place dream
location marks in my dreams so that they might be equivilent. I have many
recurring dream locations, and I need to go back through and read them to get
where they are.

For now, I need to get ready for work. That's enough on that for now.
