So, right now, it is just before six in the morning. I have just taken another
fat hit, and I am still deciding what I want to do in the present.

In order to become faster at performing regular tasks, I will copy over the
address from this youtube video, that I am watching right now.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1GGxzSPP0J0&t=1146s](morning coffee. [lofi \ jazzhop \ chillmix])

Okay, so TIL that the link must go first. The brackets are corner brackets
first, followed by the parens, followed by whatever the fuck you want.

That all being said, I'm not sure if these get imbedded in the final pandoc
documents.

Also, all of that being said, I am only something like three minutes in to my
writing session right now, but I already feel more comfortable than I have felt
in a long time. I like this set up a lot, actually. I will use it from now on.

Okay, so I just had an idea.

I am going to visit newegg, and I am going to look at cases. I am going to find
a "standard size" for a case.

From there, I am then going to build something of a desk, similar to the desk I
have built for myself now (and, since you can't see what I look like, I must
describe to you that I am sitting on a yoga block, at the intermediate height,
typing at my twenty inch box).

I like this set up.

I also like the idea of constructing it so that it can turn to different
heights.

Ideally, I'd like to be able to use it at three levels, but that might be
overthinking things.

But, I must say, this twenty inch height is near ideal for yoga block posture.

For the purpose of continuing on this meditative practice trance, I have placed
on the background for me to listen to

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QB-fo_bGnQs](Chillhop Essentials - Spring 2019 - chill hiphop & beats to relax)

So that was pretty good, I say my time on that is getting better.

Still, though, I must say something. First, 

okay, so the pause and new paragraph there was intentional. I unplugged my
keyboard from my tower, plugged it in to my work machine, and typed out an
email to a collegue. Then, after I was done with that, I unplugged the keyboard
from the work device, and plugged it back in to my tower.

So, now I am typing free, ready to live myself out in teh world. I am ready to
reveal to the world my doings, my essence, my being, and so forth. I want
everyone to see what it is that I am able to do. This is a typing test under
the dvorak keyboard layout. I am taking pretty great care in ensuring that I
type the correct words, and that I don't slip up at any point or make any
mistakes. I like typing with ymy eyes closed sometimes though, buceasue it
allowsm e to get out what I want ot get out whithout any distractions. So I
want to slow down a littele bit. I want to make sure that I ma ding thingk
gorrectly.

Okay, so this time I am typing again, but I am ensuring that my camera doesn't
have to focus in and out all the time due to the fucked up shit that it has go
through in order to see a strobing led keyobard. I mean, jesus fuck, why does a
keyboard with monochrome backlighting need lighting controls? Is that not just
fucked? Is there nothing more insane that a keyboard that does that? I don't
know, mbut at this point now I feel like I have a good amount of material, so
lets play it back ad see what it looks like.

So right now I am something of a narcisist. I suppose I don't even know how to
spell the word narcisist. I think it is something like that, but I don't know
for sure.

Regardless, I think it would be wise if I told myself some sort of story, to
bring myself back out into the world of the living.

So I sang myself the hymn of the fayth. I said, eaue, and then I said, a no ga
no hai. And I think that is the best anthropormophization of the words, but I
don't know.

So here I am sitting, and listening to some chill step nonsense, and I am
muted, and Evan is on the other end.

