I want to see how many words I can type in one minuet. right now it is nine o
three, and I just saw it turn to that ammount, os I figure when I watch and i
see it turn to nine o four, then I can tell you when I am bale to  type as mony
words as you see on the page. Once I do a word count, I will have the number of
words that I was able to type. it is still that time, and it has not changed
yet. I don't know when it will change, 

That was it.

Word count 101.
Char count 439.

Interesting, methinks.

9:06

This time I am making a consolidated effort to make larger and bigger and
moister and much larger words. Confabulating words is my speciality at this
point. I am the master and chef of all things culinary, and I am the king and
ruler of all things conqueuror. I don't even know how to spell taht word, but I
am attempting to do so, and it is amusing.

I don't know why I just decided to start a new parag

9:07

Word Count 80
Char count 412

I just want to warm myself u
9:08

Okay, I suppose I won't warm myself uy to th estart tiem. I spuppose it will
just start, and Iwan't have any say in it. I think it is better if I close my
eyes and don't liook at teh words I am typing. When I focus on the time, I see
something else entirely, I imagine, in ym third eye, the image of a clock, nad
the second hand is going arodund and around like that, and everyt time tih
second hand ticks, I t

9:09

I want to warm up now for some time. I want to continue to type at a rather
steady pace, but when it gets to the point that it turns to the new time, I
will type that new time, and I will get into it. And when I get into it, I will
type something totally different than what I am typing now. or it could 

9:10

be the same stuff that I am typing now. It dos'nt matter honest'ly whatvere I
want tyo type will be good enough to type right  now . THis is interesting,
becasue when I fogcus on just going really fast like this. I get really sloppy,
and when I get really sloppy,  I get really slow, and since it is slow, I think
to myself, "Why is it this sloppy, I know I gcon get it fast by not being slo

9:11

ppy like this, but I can't do it, I must have some reason te be sloppy in order
to justify my existance. But since it is sloppy, I must indicate something
about the nature being sloppy to the world.

Being a sloppy person does not mean you are dirty It might mean that you have
more propensity to being

9:12

dirty, but that doesn't matter. It's amazing to me how many words I can bring
myself to type in such a short timespan. When I just force myself to get words
out into the processor, it kind of just happens, and when that happens, I get
to a point where I come to a conclusion about how I want to live my life, and
what I need to do in order to get it all together. But it's not about that at
all, really,

9:13

It's about containing your shit all inside a bag, and bringing it to the shit
store, and selling. I have tried other methods of disposing of my shit, but
those methods are inferior to this one, at least in my experience. Of course,
flushing it down into the sewers is one way to eliminate your shit.

9:14

or at least, put it in the toilet and forget about it. But when you do this,
all of your shit isn't together. It all originated from the same place, but I
think it would be silly to think that one turd in the sewers has anything to do
with the other thing that I was talking about

9:15

Holy shit I lost my train of thought there, lets bring it back some. I was just
talking about in a bit ago about something regarding shit, and I don't know
what the punch line meant to be, but I don't think I arrived at it. But that's
fine, I don't have to arrive at it, it's just something that has to come out of
the universe naturally, or something.

9:16

I was accused of praying yesterday. I was sitting on top of the parking garage,
doing the wim hof method as one does, and meditating after that. I intended to
sit for a total of about twenty minutes total, but at about fifteen minutes in,
after I had finished the power breathes and was working on the silent
meditation portion

9:17

Two security guards walked up to me, and asked me who I was, what I was doing
here. I told them I was meditating, and they introduced themselves, and I said,
"Oh, I'm sorry for the bother, I don't want to worry anyone, but I find it a
nice place to meditate. If I must find another place to sit

9:18 

for some time then I can do that. To which they said, "Okay." It felt like we
had maybe a whole host of back and forth exchanges about "libaility" followed
by "I understand completely" followed but, "Yes, of course, that's great, but
also, risk, anxiety, etc." and I followed

9:19

that up also with things like, "Yes, I totally get it, if people are worried
about me, then I shouldn't be sitting here. I'm sorry you had to come all the
way up here to deal with this."

At around this point is when they started going back down, I removed myself
from the seat, and 

9:20

I went down to my car to put my bag back in it's proper place. When I was doing
that, I then decided to cut my meditation session some minutes short, because,
well, it had to be, so I walked down the parking garage stairs. When I did
that, I saw, coming out of the elevator as I got to the obttom of the stairs,
the woman who confronted me at the top.

9:21

Of course, she felt compelled to continue her conversation, and said something
like, "Oh, thank you so much for being understanding and cooperative, you must
understand that it's such a liability for us to have someone just sitting on
top of the parking garage. We didn't know if maybe you had to face a certain
direction in relation to the sun, and that's why you were sitting there

9:22

... And on and on with this sort of babble about costs and liabilities. All of
the things she had already told me, and we had already said that we agreed
about,

9:23

she told me all of these things again, and this time, I wanted to something to
the tune of, "Yes, we already agreed on this" but when I said it, I redacted
the word 'already' because it seemed in poor taste to include it.

9:24

10:08

Okay, so I'm not sure how I feel about putting timestamps all throughout my
journal. I think it is something that I should do once I start, and once I end,
and that way, what I can do is I can run a whole analysis on the entire block,
and get a good running average, and the concept of variance of anything in
beteween this block and another isn't really that big of a deal.

I could run an anlysis and see, but I presume that it woul reveal that, while
there are certainly some ponits that have faster speeds than others, there is
genereally nothing that can be done about this. In facte, I would say quite the
opposite is true. It should be the case that there are some points that you are
able to type much more quiclky than others, mustoly becasue you have in your
head the words that you want to see, and in some sense you act only a a
dictator (of dictation) in reciting it down and putting in to the keyboard.

But what this ebb and flow represents is to things. One, typing quickly is
exhausting, but it is exhausting on an entirely different dimension to type
slowly and steadily over a long period of time. Two, it represents the fact
there might be some things that I know I want to say, and when I get to a
certain point, I must pause, and think through the things that I want to say.
THis act of pausing, reconisdering, and continuing, I think is criticle to
haveing a good stream of consciousness.

So for instance, to give a good example of this principle at work, I just gave
a moment of pause right there, and allowed myself to take a bite of some food
before I continued to write. But of course, I only have this much to write, and
when I am finished chewing this bite of food, it will be about the time that I
have nothing to talk about again.

I want to listen to music. THis is what I want to do. I want to post a link
here, and then, based upon that link, I want to write something out, and when I
read it back, I am curious how well the music will match up with what I write.

So let us go for that.

[Celldweller - The Imperial March (Instrumental)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BzmI4S36Xvc)

So I am listening right now. I have just started the piece. Right now all I
hear is the standard theme.

I must admit, I have not listened to this version before, I have only listened
to the one with teh lyrics.

I see there is a fragmented version of the main theme.

Now it's filled in a little more.

I like the way it is building on top of itself.

This exact build up is I think uninteresting.

But this third time we've been introduced to the main theme is really dope.

The transistions are cool, but have nothing that I can tell off hand to do with
the theme itself.

I like that we get a breakdown version of the theme again after the dubstep
version.

Then of course, we go straight to the dubstep version again.

I like it without the lyrics. Because the lyrics were simply "You don't know
the power, of the Dark Side" over and over with little variation, and it was
difficult to focus on the background with it there.

[Celldweller - The Imperial March (Star Wars Cover)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YzbJMCSfcPY)

You don't know the power, of the dark side. 

[Vader breathing]

You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.
You don't know the power, of the dark side.

[Vader breathing]

You don't know the power

[Theme plays without breathing or lyrics]

You don't know the power
You don't know the power

[Dubstep version of theme without lyrics]

[Transistion]

the dark side
the dark side
the dark side
the dark side

[Dubstep version of theme without lyrics]

You don't know the power

[Celldweller - The Imperial March (Pegboard Nerds Remix)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcV1V9Tgq8M)

So I have been listening to this version now for about two minutes so far, and
I must say that it's interesting at the very least, but it reminds me of
something going haywire with the sound system more than anything else. I like
the usage of James Earl Jones voice in parts though, I'm curious where they got
that sound byte from. I'm assuming that it was taken from the movie, but to
extract it so beautifully I think is impressive.

So far, I am just sort of taken aback by the amount of times I have been teased
by the theme, only to be followed up by some "sick techno beat" or whatever.
It's seems almost sacriligous in some ways. Of course, saying something like
that is absurd, but what I mean is that I don't think it totatlly fits what
this theme should be. Well, it's not even the imperial march theme all the
time, it's somethings this other, completely made up theme that seems to have
nothing to do with starwars.

Maybe it's a homage to Celldweller or something, I don't know. I can't be asked
to provide a complete analysis on all of these works.

And it just sort of ended. I was not expecting that, but there you go. It's
done now.

--

1:58

So at this point, I want to get to writing about things just for the sake of
writing them. In other words, I don't know if a prompt would be good, or if
some other way of talking about it would be good. Essentially, what we are
looking at is, I want to become very good at writing out stories. And I think
it's important to recognize the difference between performance and practice.

In other words, when it comes to practicing something like writing, I think it
is best just to stay calm, have a nice environment, and focus on getting out as
many words as you can in the time that you have. You want to ensure that you
are entirely comfortable in your setting. You want to make certain that you
have a comfortable sitting position, that you're fingers are in a comfortable
position in relation to the keyboard, and you want to make sure that you arms
rest in a natural way over the keys of the keyboard.

So I have just taken a break, and gone and retrieved some cloths so that my
hands may be higher up. I'm not sure if they need to be higher or lower now.

I have just gone for something like a middle ground, and everything seems good
now.

So I want to come up with ideas to make practicing writing be something
entertaining for me.

I just finished watching a video of someone who posted something about
practicing the piano. She was clearly much more practiced than I ever have been
at the piano, and was talking about practicing pieces like Listz and Chopin,
and what goes in to practicing the really flourishy or the really intricate
sections.

It reminds me when I used to practice Bach, and I made a system for myself
where I would practice one measure at a time, and loop my practice from the end
of the piece to the front, practicing each measurue in repetition like that.

What this girl did, that I have thought about before, but never actually done
because I am musically a prude, is that she talked about the ability to take a
small excerpt out of a piece of music, and create something like a motif out of
it. Then, she said that you should practice that motif over and over, in a
variety of ways, that allow you to come up with fun practice loops.

So, of course, this sort of stuff is great if I want to get back in to learning
pieces on the piano and rehersing them for my own enjoyment, but I haven't done
that in a very long time and I don't plan on returning to that level of
commitment for something like the piano any time soon.

So then, as I was watching this video, though, I was still getting this feeling
like a wanted to put my fingers on a piano and play. But right now I am at
work, and that is not possible.

Of course, when I realized this, I immediately next went to asking myself the
reason why I felt compelled in that moment to stand up from my desk and walk
towards my car and return home where there is a piano and attempt this
practicing method. ANd the reason I knew I felt compelled to do that was
because, in this video, this woman was able to demonstrate the effectiveness of
this practing method, and seeing something produce results in such a quick and
effective manner is obviously going to evoke some kind of empathetic response
in my own psyche.

So once I recognized this, I started to assimilate that feeling with the
understanding that I am not going to return the piano any time soon in any sort
of serious way, but instead, I am writing works of fiction and non-fiction
right now that I want to get out of my head and on to a tangible medium, and I
want to practice getting those things out of my head in a smooth, effecient,
streamlined manner. I want to be able to have a process whereby I am able to
spend time, and out of that time spent comes a whole multilayered process of
writting, edditing, brainstorming, freewriting, and so forth that allows me to
eventually produce content that will be as refined and as polished as this
ladies pieces and excerpts were after she practiced them for some time.

Now, I must say that it is interesting to talk about things in this way,
because what we are doing is we are comparing the art of performing a piece on
the piano to writing a piece of literature. THe two things, while they are both
artistic medium in that they are to be consumed by someone for no tangible
benefit, are different in that the way these mediums are expressed is
different.

Piano is compossed by the composer, and the performed by the performer, and
when a performer partakes in the art that they have chosen, their performance
happens once, and anyone who was there to take witness of it was there to take
witness of it, and then it's gone. The performance might be recorded, in which
case there is something like a finished product, but the performer, in the
moment, is concerened with the timing of his or her notes, and is concerned
with performing the piece to the best of their ability. They are aware that any
lapse in concentration could cause the performance to be negatively altered, so
all distraction must be taken out of focus so that the piece is it's fullest
glory can be performed by the individual.

To contrast this, writing is a form of art that takes place outside of time.
When a write writes a piece of work (which would be the analog of a performer
performing a piece of music) what happens is that the writer puts words on a
page. You could draw more parallels between the notes and the words, and you
couldi talk about the paragraphs vs the passages, and so forth, but I think the
strangest thing about this whole analogy is that the performance is something
that "takes place", and if the consumer of the art is not present, they will
never be able to experience the art, in the case of a writer, after the writer
has written his piece, it is done, and any consumer at any time can consume
that art work without requiring that the artist return to his work.

So in that way, performing and writing are very different sort of endeavors.
The point I am trying to make here is that, when I look at a method that is
used by this lady to practice performing, and I decide that this method is a
very strong method to learn a piece of music on the piano, I also see that at
the same time, if I were to try and apply this type of practice directly to my
writing, I have to come up with something totally different to apply here.

However, I think this sort of practice is important for writing as well as for
performing. I have found that when I write and rewrite the same scene over and
over, not referencing the first scene when I write it a second time, between
the two of them, I am able to more and more come up with someething that
resembles the end product that I am trying to achieve. So in other words, I
think the best way to apply the method of practice that this woman applied to
piano to writing, we would have to modify it in such a way that I am allowed to
write and rewrite the same aspect of the same scene in many different ways.

It's interseting, though, when I think about these things. The parallels
between writing and music are so stunning when you really get down to it, but
at the same time, trying to draw any sort of "hard" parallels ("hard" meaning
placing out any sort of strict rules for how the two arts relate) always tends
to be incorrect when comparing these two kinds of work.

So, instead of attempting to descibe things in terms of music, and then talking
about how the musical idea will translate over to the writing idea, we will
instead describe things just in terms of writing, and then from there, we will
descirbe the practice method that I want to attempt to get in to.

So first, when we talk about a writing process, what are some aspects of
practice which needs to be honed.

So the first, and most obvious thing, that needs to be practiced when it comes
to writing is actually getting the words to exist somewhere. In my case, this
usually involves typing, but physically writing with pen and paper also counts.

Practing these things involves understanding the mechanics of the hand, and
while such practice is certainly useful, and undoubtebly invaluable to the art
of becoming a writer, I am not so concerned with talking about how to become
proficient at thes ethings. I have spent the past year or so working in
typeracer to hone in my typing speed, and I have gotten to thep oint wheer I
can rather consistently exceed 90 words per minute with 98% accuracy rating.
While that is certainly not the most impressive typing speed on the planet,
when you wish to type things out for hours on end, speed doesn't matter so much
as consistency, and I am rather proud of my 98% accuracy rating.

Similar exercises could be done for penmenship, but I am not going to concern
myself about such things here.

So then, the next thing that we have to talk about when it comes to writing is
what the writing is actually going to be about. So the first thing to decide
when it comes to something becoming publishable (not that I intend to publish
anything I write, but I'm just making a point) I ask myself some basic
questions.

What sort of work is this? As in fiction or non? Deep or light? Funny or
serious? Intellectuall or layed back? So on and so on.

Again, I don't want to dwell to long on this idea. I don't usually have any
problem coming up with something to write about, my problem usually comes in
following through with the ideas that I think are good ones, and find their way
to completion. In other words, I am certainly not lacking when it comes to
things like "things I could want to write about" and because of that, I don't
want to dwell too long on what topics can make a good work.

But what I do want to say here is that, at this stage of development, the
concept of what exactly you want to write about should be in the process of
becmoing crystallized. Tools like freewriting are very good for when I don't
know what I want to write about, and just want to let my thoughts flow from
themselves. Once the freewriting is done, however, I have a much better idea
about what it is that I am writing, what it looks like, what it's style is, and
so forth.

So that comes to the next part of the writing process. Once I have the topic,
and a (very) rough outline of maybe how I want to go through and explore this
topic in the form of the written word, the next step becomes actually writing a
lot of shit.

Now, at this point, there is something that I have been meaning to try, but
haven't actually gotten around to perfecting (when it comes to my techniques),
but it's at this point where the ideas for how to practice writing come in.

At this point, I am not so sure what the "best" method would be for getting
together just a host of raw material to use. Freewriting is great for just
getting words on a page, but I want the next step, the step after freewriting,
to have something to do with continuing to get words on the page, but getting
them on the page in a way that allows me to review what I have written, and go
back over it, and organize it, and so on.

In other words, once I have gotten something like the rough idea of how
everything goes, I believe my writing process will go in iterative stages. Or
at least, that's how I've noticed that my writing process goes.

So suppose we are at one iteration of our stage. We have just finished a draft,
and we are now reading it to see how it reads, what it reads like, and so on.
As I am reading the draft, I think about a new scene. I think, "Maybe at this
point in the story, Susan doesn't actually find the grail at first, but has to
look around to find it" or something of the sort. Of course, this is totally a
contrived example, but it's what I want to use.

So, now that I have a new idea for how I want the scene where Susan finds the
grail to go, it's at this point that I think having some sort of organized
practice session would be beneficial to me.

I am thinking something like, "write the scene over and over, never referencing
the other scenes to do so. Do this for a bunch of takes. When you have many
takes, continue to review and go over them, but don't think about too much what
the "correct" way that the scene "must" go. Instead, think in terms of all the
ways that the scene could go.

I would also say that, during this step, you should also throw in as many
ridiculous examples of how the scene may go as well. You could have Susan trip
and fall and break her glasses, and when she puts the glasses on, she sees the
grail. Or maybe, Susan opens a door, and arrows start flying at her, and just
as she finishes dodging the last arrow, she sees the grail on the pedastal. Or
maybe Susan's friend Doug calls her on the phone while she's in the fobidden
temple, and after she is finished with her call, she looks up and finds the
grail.

The point is, there is no one, correct, way that the scene has to written.

But there is another point as well. The point is that, in writing, I think it
is still best to think of things in terms of practice vs performance.

So I think, it's important to remember that, when you are doing this, this
whole practice is only there to get you more familiar with putting words
togethre in a way which could evoke some sort of response in the consumer of
the work. This is practice. It doesn't matter if the sentence structure of the
phrase where Karen reveals she is cheating on Steve has a dangling participle
at this point; obviously, we want to practice writing as well as we can, but
we're not going to let some utopian idea of always writing perfectly stop us
from writing at all.

However, when it comes to performance, we have a totally different beast. I
like the idea of practicing a scene, and writing it over many times before it
becomes something like second nature. I could forsee getting to a point where,
for any particular scene in the work I am writing, I could write it over in a
particular way (whatever way is the most consistent way that I write it over
all of the iterations) as if it were second nature. I could do it while
listening to a podcast, or while watching a sports game. It's somethnig I could
do idly, similar to a trick in a video game or a parkour move.

If it's possible to get to a point like this for all of the scenes, then I
think there comes a point where a full performance is neccesary. It becomes
important to write the whole scene, from start to finish, in it's entirely.

Now, whatever sort of mental state I need to get in to achieve something like
this is a tiring thing. To maintain this level of writing, and not only
writing, but writing well, for such a long time, I think is quite a task to
behold.

But, just like any performance, the more you practice at it, the more second
nature it will become, and performance itself becomes something taht you
practice it and become more proficient at.

But again, I think it's important to understand our distinction between musical
performance and writing performance. Writing performance is still not as
precise as musical performance. In music, if I perform and hit a wrong note, it
is there in the performance and there is nothing that can be done about it any
more. But in writing, after a performance I can go back and edit the
performance to rough out any places where there might be incorrect sentence
structure or grammer. I can re-read the performance, and realize that I should
have included a sentence that I thought I wrote, but didn't, and I can,
afterward, include it.

Because of the ability of the writer to perform these endless kinds of edits on
their own work, it becomes difficult to see the difference between performance
and practice. But I think the big difference is that, with practice (which I
want to take up now) the whole point is writing out all of the scenes of your
piece in all sorts of ways. When you do this, when you've written out your
scenes dozens of times, writing out the scene becomes something a practice, and
you get better and better at "catching up" to the thoughts of what you think
"should" be happening to your characters.

This way, when you find yourself in a state of mind where you just want to "get
it all out", you are able to get it all out, you know how to do it, and you can
focus yourself down a specific path all the way through the piece. THis way,
you have something like a sense of a unifying consciosness which will permiate
the whole of the piece you write, and you are only able to produce something
like this because you put the time in to practice it before you did.

So I think that about does it when it comes to writing practice. This has been
instructive for me, because it has helped me realize that there are multiple
levels that you can practice writing at. Currently, I am praticing at the
reciting, and then at the freewriting aspects, but I think the next stage is in
writing specific scenes over and over.

One last point that I just thought about, that I want to go over before I make
my way to the gym, is that this practice doesn't have to be with your own
characetrs, and with your own stories. In fact, one of my most profound stories
so far that I have written has been the dialogue of Seth and Cain, and it's in
writing this story that I have started to come up with this idea of "iterative"
writing like this. It's because I kept having a hard time coming up with what
was "correct" about what happened between Seth and Cain and what they talked
about that I started to develop this iterative approach of writing.

One disadvantage that I want to lay out for this approach is that it require a
lot of typing. If you are not proficient at the first or second forms of
practice, you must practice those things first before you can become proficient
at the third layer. But fortunatly, most people that are writers have already
inadvertantly put practice in to the first and second aspects even if they
don't realize it. I have been explicitely doing so for the past few months, but
it is only just now that I have started to realize that there is a whole nother
level to this that I am just now getting to the point where I feel as though I
can touch it.

So all of that to say, I think it's important not to let the sheer volume of
writing neccesary to do this sort of thing deter me from doing it. The volume
becomes much less intimidating when you realize that most of the volume doesn't
have to be high quality writing material.

Of course, you want your finished product to be high quality, and you want as
much as you write to be conceivably as high quality as possible, but again, I
think we must be aware that paralysis of perfection is particularly deadly when
it comes to this variety of writing and practice.

It's important to recognize that not everything you write will be good, and
that's okay. It's also important to recognize that not everything you write
needs to contribute in any way to the finished work. In fact, if my method of
practice were to be taken to it's extreme, literally none of the material you
write during practice would be used during performance, and none of it would
touch the finished work. Only the material written during "performance" would
be used.

Which also runs us in to the question of how to keep track of all of this
nonsense. I think the best way would be to have a directory for each new work,
and to have sessions (labeled as best they can) for freewriting and practice,
and then to have sessions for actual performance and editing.

At the present moment, I would like to go work out, but I am getting excited
about this prospect of writing practice, and would like to put it to the test
when I get back.

3:08
