So right now I very much want to write out whatever I want to write out, and if
it means anything in the end, it will mean something, but if it doesn't mean
anything in the end, then it won't mean anything. I don't know how much I like
to say these sorts of tautilogical statements, but it's true.

So all of that to say, I am mostly just saying tautaulogical statements. I
think that is the whole point of fiction. It's saying things that are
tautalogically true.

But I don't know how much of that even matters. After all, this is free
writing, so I am able to write as much or as little as I want.

Something I was thinking about the other day was this. So, during one of my
practice sessions, I was writing out how I think one of the sections will go
for my work, and it's a whole thing that I have to do. But as I was doing that,
I got to a point where I was at a point where I totally just lost the words
that I was going to type. I am going to attempt to read as I am writing the
rest of my stuff to see if I can latch back on to my train of thought.

So I had an idea about how I wanted to practice my writing.

Something I have noticed in my writing is that, after I write something, that
iteration of it is gone. I don't want to write it again, I don't want to even
think about it again. I want it gone from my memory.

So I think, what needs to happen is, when I practice things like this, I need
to take excerpts from those sessions, and I need to extract those excerpts
which would fit well in a finished work. THen I need to copy that, and I need
to put it in it's own document. THen, when it's in it's own document, I can
later go in, and make an "editting session" whereby I compile all of the text
that I practiced, I piece it together in a way that creates a coherent
narrative, and then I put a nice little bow on that and stich the pieces
together and there we have something like a draft.

Now, practicing this editing process I think is quite a bit harder than
practicing other things, becasue the pre-requisite for editting practice is in
actually having material to edit. So it must come after that.

But, because I have been practicing my creation of content so much over the
past few months, I have gotten pretty good at it, and I have also ammassed a
good amount of original content for my stories that is just waiting to be
stitched into something.

So, I think that is the most meaningful thing. I think, the structure of the
folders that I keep this sort of stuff going in is important. I need to have
dated practice sessions, but I also need to have a work board where I copy and
paste material from these practice sessions, and then from these workboards, I
then work to create a draft of the finished work.

Of course, once the first full complete draft is created, then it's a matter of
simple editting for grammar and things, and also to make sure that there isn't
something that was missed in the revision process.

Also, at this point is a good time step away, and return to the draft at a
later date to see how it reads without the influence of having written it.

So, with all of that being said, I am feeling somewhat inspired to start to
work on my Cain and Seth story, and if I could get the organization of that
folder towards something that I would like, then I would be very happy.
