So last night I had two dreams. The first dream took place in my parents house.
We were in the den, and in the den, Collin was there with a couple of other
people, and we were doing a BJJ class, but it wasn't a class so much as it was
just we were there and we were doing BJJ. As in, I don't remember actually
rolling or drilling anything, but in the dream we were all together, and it was
a BJJ class.

Regardless, after we were done, I remember talking with my mom, and I went in
to the kitchen, and I started packing up my things, because I told her that I
was going to head to my apartment at school, because classes were about to
begin, and I needed to be ready.

Of course, this is rather silly since I'm not in school anymore, but I remember
my mom trying to convince me to stay. I kept packing my things, and I told her
that I am going to go to my apartment, and she continued to try and convince me
for a bit before she quit.

After she stopped, I was having trouble getting all of my things. It was one of
those dreams where I kept checking and double checking, and every time I double
checked, something was different.

So the second dream took place in a car. I was in a car, on a trip with Jack
and Peter, and they were talking about how they were going to an Ultimate camp,
and they really wanted to go because there was an individual, who I do not know
the name of, who they wanted to try and get an in with, so they could play on
the pro teams there.

I remember being mostly uninterested in this, but as we were going, Peter
mentioned that he was feeling very stiff. He also mentioned that his back was
not feeling so great. So I offered to massage his back for him. He agreed.

So we were out of the car now, and he layed on his stomach on the ground, and I
got on top of him, and started adjusting his back. I felt first, his back was
very much curving to the right, so I started to really dig in and loosen up the
muscles on his right side. As I was doing that, I was using my elbow, and he
started going, "Oh, yeah, a girlfriend would really like you if you did this to
her."

I continued to adjust, and get feedback from him. I remember working out his
shoulders, and then I went to his knees, and I was using the point of my elbow
to work out all of the muscles for him. That was the extent of th edream.

I think, this is a case of my own stiffness and back problems being supplanted
on to another dream person.
