So I wanted to write in here, for the purpose of writing in here. There is not
much that I really want to say or dwell on, beyond just that I am here, at
Alliant right now, at 8 in the morning. This is the first day in a long time
that I have arrived to work at 8.

So yeah, there is not much more to say on that front. Mostly, what I wanted to
do is free write about this case that I am on. I am going to summarize it
without looking at it, and see how close I am from there. So the summary of the
case.

This case is an 8 hour case. It involves adding a new system event. This system
event is when there are invoices with items that have not been delivered in the
past 30 days. Or something like that. Basically, it's a query against the
invoices with some where clause.

So with that, that query is what will flag the system event.

Like all system events, this system event will create a record to the
notification table. It will say, "This event has spawned" and it will leave a
background event to respond to that event. When it responds, the responder
creates a ticket, and kicks off any emails that need to be sent.

On the ticket should be the day that the thing was sent out. The invoices
should look in a range of X days, only if the nearest ticket is more than X
days out.

Most of this happens in the background worker. I'm going to need to add system
event records to alliantweb1/dev, and some front end shenanigans to get the
events to display (maybe). Befond that, the 2.0 side is rather minimal. The
tester will use the service front end to check on the tickets, so keep that in
mind.

I think that about covers what needs to happen for the case.

Also, for Graces case, it is ARSReporting line 21097 in
GetRouteLoadReconciliation. Basically, what needs to change is, the report
needs to sort by sku, and size a and size b, but it's not so the crystal is
fucking up the data.

