So I very much want to do something creative right now. What that is exactly, I
am not sure, but I want to do something where I am producing something in
creative output, and getting it to the point where it's something like that.

Words are hard to make right now because I am not in a time of day to make
words ina way that makes any sort f sense to me right now.

I think what I am going to do is close my eyes and write out the words that I
am going to say in my mind.

When I dio this, what I am doing is practicing writing out individual words in
a way that allows me to get to ap point where I am onlly concerned with typing
out words and not at all concerned with what those words are at all.

I also like practicing like this where I have no concept of how long I am going
for or how much I want to do this.

I also like doing this where I am having something like a steady cadence with
my words, and getting out everything that I am typing with pretty consistent
accuracy.

Not only that, but also, i am to the point where I think it is correct to say
that the time between words is no different than the time between characters.

That is, the amount of time it takes me to type the six litters in a five
letter word, followed by the space that comes before or after it, when you add
up all of these times, and you take the amount of ctime it takes me to get from
the last letter of the ward previous (which would be the space bar) and the
first letter of the next word, the cadence of all o fthose dkey presses I
attempt to make in a completely equal way.

Of course, idt doesn't always come out like that, but I think that thinking
about it like thiat is the best way to got to a point where i am practicing my
typing in a safe and secure way.

Something also that I want to say is that taking pauses occasionally isokay. I
don't mind taking pauses or short breaks. After all, one is not always inspired
to type out words in a super fast manner, and taking a short break can
facilitate the sort of creativity that should stay at least at a dull minimum
while doing these sorts of practice sessions.

In other words, I think it would be safe to say, if I practiced like this, and
then I read it back, and I told myself that what I read back was garbage, then
I would say, "That is garbage, and that practice session was not worthwhile."

What I am saying is, during these practice sessions, it is important to me that
the words that I type have some sort of creative significance. Even if it's not
the most interesting content in the world, it's at least content that, if I
were, some day a few years in the future, to read back, it would be at the very
least readable to the end.

For if it takes me some number of minutes to write it, it will take me that
number of minutes divided by the number four number of minutes to read it.

Or stated in the equivielent way, if it takes me some number of minutes to read
something, it will usually take me around three to four times the number of
minutes to write that same passage.

However you want to put it, reading and writing are correlated in intimate
ways, so neglecting one of them, even if you may think it is for the sake of
the other, is always doomed to fail.

So, that being said, when you are doing something like writing practice, I
think it's important to remember a certain fact. When you are doing writing
practice, it's with the understanding that, for every hour our so you spend
working on your writing, around an hour or so will be spent at some point
reading something else.

I like this, because it allows me to remove the distraction of imbalance. I
promise myself that if I do some writing, I will also do some reading.

But sometimes the promise doesn't work. Sometimes, I promise my future self
something that I do not follow through on. Then, my future self (which becomes
my present self) then must collect debts from the past in order to make up
these promises. But sometimes my past self can't pay for them, in which case I
must make more promises to myself to pay off all of this debt, but I make these
promises now not to my present self but my future future self.

You can see how debts and promises can stack up like this.

So yeah, taking another quick break is good. I have reached the end of a train
of thought, and I am just letting the next thought flow in to me as it may see
fit.

It's interesting when writing out trains of thought, in comparison to
meditating and observing them in my own consciousness itself. The difference
is, the thoughts that occur in the consciousness must be more strong for them
to arise in this sort of situation. In other words, the thoughts that become
"Mindless Noise" when I am meditating and attempting to focus on my breathing
become silent when the noise of writing becomes the primary focus.

But the point is, even still, when the noise of writing is silent enough, I am
allowed to, in some sense, tune back in to that noise, and see which noises
resound with me the most strongly. Once I am able to tune in to that stream of
consciousness, and I am able to justify it's volume in my mind, then I will be
able to take that piece out of my mind and on to the page as well.

But until then, I must remain at a sort of quiet stillness. I must write words
as they come to me. I must not dwell on the words that I just wrote, and i must
not think about the words that I may or may not write in the future. All that
matters, especially in the context of writing practice, which I would say this
session still is, is the concept of getting out many kinds of varying words,
with all sorts of variatey that I have never put together before.

If I am able to do something like that, then I would say that I am succeeding
pretty well with the way that I write.

So I just had a pretty decently high resolution image come to me about Brandon
Sanderson and his work. I have noticed that I like the way he talks about
writing, and love the way he breaks down his own plots, and I love the way he
talks about his own worlds. But I must say, as of yet, I have not found
anything of his that has blown me away.

I intend to read Elantris, and based upon what happens in that novel, I will
decide if I enjoy Sanderson's work or not. I might read other Mistborn Novels,
as well, but nothing from the first age anymore. I more or less undertand that
Vin is to become something of a Christ figrue in his mythology, and so I don't
need to read any more of her saga to get the idea of what she is doing.

I might ask Ruel tomorrow if he has the first one in the other Mistborn series.
I could look it up also. Obviously, not right now, because that would be a
distraction.

Actually, I will read Elantris before I ask Ruel anything.

the point is, I am pursuing that entire venture, and I am getting to the point
where I am saying that I want to almost trying and write it out right now.

Let's do that actually, that seems likea  good idea.

I am going to spend some time to take a hit, and then I will work on
typographycially analyzing the Elantris chapter 1 right now. I have some time
to do that.

--

The Elantris city gate boomed shut behind him with a shocking sound of
finality. Raoden slumped against it, thoughts numbed by the day's events.

It was as if his memories belonged to another person. His father, King Iadon,
hadn't met Raoden's gaze as he ordered the priests to prepare his son and throw
him into Elantris. It had been done swiftly and quietly; Iadon couldn't afford
to let it be known that the crown prince was an Elantrian. Ten years ago, the
Shaod would have mad Raoden a god. Now, instead of making people into
silver-skinned deities, it changed them into sickly monstrosities.

Raoden shook his head in disbelief. The Shaod was a thing that happened to
other people-distant people. People wo deserved to be cursed. Not the crown
prince of Arelon. Not Raoden.

The city of Elantris stretched out before him. Its high walls were lined with
guardhouses and soldiers-men inteded not to keep enemies out of the city, but
to keep its inhabitants from escaping. Since the Reod, every person taken by
the Shaod had been thrown into Elantris to rot; the fallen city had become an
expansive tomb for those whose bodies had forgotten how to die.

Raoden could remember standing on those walls, looking down on Elantris's dread
inhabitants, just as the guards now looked down on him. The city had seemed far
away then, even though he had been standing just outside of it. He had
wondered, philophically, what it would be like to walk those blackened streets.

Now he was going to find out.

Raoden pushed against the gate for a moment, as if to force hi body through, to
cleanse his flesh of its taint. He lowered his head, releasing a quiet moan. He
felt like curling into a ball on the grimy stones and waiting until he woke
from this dream. Except, he knew he would never awaken. The priests said that
this nightmare would never end.

But, somewhere, something within urged him forward. He knew he had to keep
movig-for if he stopped, he feared he'd simply give up. The Shaod had taken his
body. He couldn't let it take his mind as well.

So, using his pride like a shield agaisnt despair, dejection, and-most
important-self-pity, Raoden raised his head to stare damnation in the eyes.

Okay, so this is me now again, typing words that I want to type. That was fun
and all, but it fel too much like typing words and not so much like reading or
writing or anything eles. Holy shit, so I just closed my eyes and now I am to
the point where I can read everything that is going on in my thoughts, and I
can get to the point where I am just comfdortable with typing like this in this
way with no inurruptingos or anything hindering the wondrous things that are
going on right now.
Right now, I don't know how much I am typing and huw much my words are just
digberish. Like that word was gibberish, but I don't think the most recent
attempt of me spelling tath word was gibberish at all. So it is possible for me
to use the word multiple times correctly, it seems.

So with that out of the way, let's now go on to talk about omething totalyl
different . Let's talk about something mundane. Let's talk about my seating
position. 

So right now, I hae my rwirists resting on some towels, and I hae something
else going on with the rest of what I am doing with my life. So I am to the
point where I am at a point where my life is to the point where I am at teh
point where I have not point to make about teh point of teh pooint of teh
ppoint of teh point of teh entier thing that I am writing. THat all being said,
I am tnow wtyping at a speed that is way to fast for it's own good, ub it is
interesting to do it at this pspeed sometmies becouse I think it comes down to
the idea that I am not fast enoguht to do this all the time, and I must teach
myself that this speed is something taht I can maintoionite for some time if I
just put my mind to it, and just lie my seilf kind of flow with the go as
Rickson Gracie would say.

I do'nt want o write anymore. I have been here for fourty five mintues, and I
have written some number of words. I don't want to count it, and I don't even
want to put int he effeort of pushing the word count buttons. That seems like
work that I do'nt want ot put in right now. But I can do it later if I so feel
like it.

So yeah, Good night for now, I will wwake up in the morning, hopefully.

12:45
