So right now I am getting to a point where I am attempting to reason about my
writing process.

I am currently thinking of going with some sort of Haskell Stack like
procedure, where I straight up have a program which handles all of the
directory management and compilation and so forth for me.

Of course, that approach is a lot of work, and would be a great way to make
sure that nothing ever gets done when it comes to actually writing anything.

So, in order to work up to that approach, what I want to do is lay out an
outline for a directory structure for my writing process.

So firstly, everything takes place in the directory "book". Each directory in
"book" is it's own independent story.

When we land in a brand now book directory, the first thing to do is create a
freewriting folder.

This folder will simply contain freewriting entries, with the date as the
filename to keep things simple.

Next will be practice. Again, simple dates should suffice.

Next up is the workbord. This will contain all of the blurbs that I think are
worth saving. Also, it will contain any raw material that I'm still not sure if
I want to keep across the next revisions.

From the workboard will go to src and img folders.

Src contains the actual source of the fiction.
Img will contain any images I create or use.

So that is freewriting, practice, workboard, src, and img.

On top of that, I'm not opposed to having various restore points. Like, saving
drafts. Of course, I could do that with git, but it seems appropiate to save
drafts as we go anyway.

Also, I wouldn't mind having some master works in the base directory. Having a
readme, a summary, synopsis, and so forth, would be helpful here.

I want to write some kind of program which takes every file in the bin
directory and compiles it into the pdf. This program could also create the
"draft restore points"

So, a couple things to note about the writing process.

The creation process only takes place, really in the practice sessions.

Creation also takes place in the workboarding section also, but that is more
transistionary/editting.

The src and img directories, once a file is transfered here, it pretty much
stays intact no matter what. No editting or formatting is done here. The file
could be renamed, sent to another directory, or deleted, but it shouldn't be
editted any further at this point.

The only reason these files exist at all is to be used as the source material
for Pandoc to create a finished work out of the whole thing.

So most of my writing process takes place in the practice/workboarding phases.

