So last night I had three dreams that I remember.

The first one I remember, I was sitting in my parents bed, on my moms side,
talking on the phone with a date that I had found on tinder. Things are going
well when my mom inturrputs me. I try to ward her off, but she is persistent,
to the point where I end up hanging up the phone, and explaining the situation
to her. She is empathetic, and apologizes, and then from there asks if I would
like some help. She goes into her closet, and behind her shoes, she pulls out a
book of sexual position. She is timid about it, but I tell her I have seen porn
before, so it's not a big deal.

The second dream is about a mother (not my mom) who has a baby. At the start of
the dream, she is holding the baby in her hands, and as she is stroking the
crown of it's head, the baby's eyes come out of their sockets. I want to say
also, that this wasn't graphic imagary from my standpoint, it was something
more like out of an impressionist painting.

Anyway, she is understandably shocked and freaked out about her baby's eyes
falling out, but a nurse there assures her that we can take the child to a
doctor that she knows, and that he can perform a procedure which will hopefully
put the child back to normal.

We go to the doctor, and he says that yes, he can perform the surgery, he just
warns the woman that it's a high risk delicate surgery, and taht she might not
want to watch the surgery as it's happening. The woman agrees, and gives the
doctor her baby.

The doctor than takes the baby into a back room, and begins work on the
procedure. When the woman asks how it's going, I assure her that the baby is in
good hands with the doctor. I, however, am curious about what exactly the
procedure looks like. I go into the other room, and I see the doctor has placed
the baby in a sort of eight armed machine, similar to what neo was placed in at
the end of the matrix trilogy, and it has arms and legs and all sorts of things
that the doctor is using to perform the surgery. Also, as part of the surgery,
the doctor was requried to use a sort of medication which enlarged the baby,
and caused it's entire body to swell, but by the end the baby would be restored
to normal.

Well, the surgery is in it's final stages, and the doctor comes to a point
where his job is done, and it's up to the baby and the machine to recover the
rest of the way. The doctor comes back to us, and tells us that the surgery is
finished, everything went well, but it will be some time before the mother can
see the baby again when it's fully recovered.

The mother is relieved, but just then, the nurse comes to the doctor, and tells
him that the baby isn't recovering properly. The doctor is alarmed, and tries
to return the baby to normal, but in the end the surgery fails, and the doctor
is dismayed to bring the news to the mother.

The mother is understandably upset, but gets to the point where she threatens
to sue for malpractice. The doctor then assures the mother that the entire
operation is on video, and he performed the surgery as best he could, and that
it was simply a dangerous surgery, and that her case would be fruitless for all
parties involved.

Well, as they start to review the tape, it is revealed that the nurse, in the
middle of the surgery, flipped a switch, which was the source of the failure.
The doctor is greatly dismayed at this, because even though it was the
malicious nurse who caused the harm in the surgery, he would have to take the
fall for it.

The last dream involved me walking through the big stadium area that's in my
dreams sometimes. Peter was there, and I remember him asking me if he should
just bug me sometimes. I said yes. I keep going, and I remember feeling very
heavy. I wanted to try and run, but it felt like the burden of the weight I was
carrying was too much.

I eventually made it to the parking garage, where I saw my car, and then a
really fancy car being worked on on the path to my car. I talk to the guys
working on the car, and I ask them what car it is, and they tell me it's a
"Mustang V11 turbo" which doesn't mean anything, but in the dream I say, "Oh
wow, cool. Is it okay if I get my car out?" because they were in the path, and
my car was on teh other side. They said sure, just as long as I didn't hit
their car at all.

The openning between the wall and the car they were working on was small, and
there were a couple steps, and I said if one of the guys directed me, I could
get out. So the guy directed me, and a went "ka thunk, ka thunk" on both of th
steps, and then I was out. I waved to him, and went on my way.
