So there are some things I want to talk about, and get out of my mind before I
begin my work day. I consider this something of a morning ritual, something
that allows me to get the clutter of the previous days out of my head, and
resume to the present, where I can refocus on the doings of today, so that
hopefully I can make a better tomorrow.

So the first thing I want to talk about is that I had something of a dream last
night. Now, because I am still medicating with canabis, I do not remember any
real specifics of the dream. But essentially, what it consisted of was me, as a
third grader again, going through school, and hanging out with other third
graders, who were my friends. There were three of us, and the three of us were
all put together because we were all no good ragamuffins who were always
getting into trouble and shared that commonality.

Well, over that school year, me and another child (who was black) become great
friends, and we mature and develop psychologically together. We argue that we
have redeemed ourself for our crimes, and have paid back our dues.

But our friend, he remains trapped in his criminal ways, and continues to show
promise but relapse, until eventually he begins to exhibit no remorse for his
life pathway.

The main point of the dream, which I remember, is that "our transformation took
place because of the existance of crime, and the existance of crime is what
will maintain our transformation."

In other words, that's my mind's very esoteric way of telling me what
Zarathustra said about the overman, that I should be like the lake that
distills all polluted rivers. It was as if our psychological transformation
turned us into that lake, and we understood that the transformation only took
place, and would only continue to take place, because the polluted river
existed in the first place.

That was the extent of the dream. It gives me an idea for a prompt that I might
want to practice at some point today. The prompt would be something like,
"Describe the story of the lake that filters all polluted streams."

So, to give a very brief idea of how the prompt would go, we could start with a
tale of a magical fairy land place with dwarves and fairies, with rivers
everywhere. The dwarves, in their mining expedentures, hit a pocket of methane,
and now all of the streams which flow into the lake from which they get their
water is being polluted with methane.

In order to combat this problem, the streams are re routed to a new lake. All
of the streams are formed into a tributary, and this tributary funnels the
water into a dam, and inside the damn is a filtration process that quickly and
efficiently seperates the water and the methane.

Many years later, this lake is considered a holy ground. The art of filtering
substances from water is lost to the fairy people, as they don't traditionally
use it. It was a one time development, which arose out of a need of the dwarves
and fairies of that time, but they had no need to pass on the skill to their
children, and their children certainly had no need to learn it for any reason.

Since this is the only one of it's kind, after some years, the tales of the
water which springs from this re-routed lake are plentiful, and people make
pilgramages and things there.

Over the centuries, this place becomes sacred. Even though the effects and
decays of time have had an effect on the dam, and the filtration, and just on
the general ecosystem, people insist on keeping everything about this lake
preserved.

Eventually, it becomes impossible to swim in, and starts to even reek of dead
mammals, carcasses, and other nonsense, because people don't want to maintain
it.

However, for a time, this was the lake that solved the problem of the dwarves.
The mythos and doctrine which arose out of the lake brought about it's
downfall, but the lake itself filtered and streamed as best it could for as
long as it lived.

Be like the lake. Though all my attempt to feed their toxin in to you, so that
you might clense it, that is actually the purpose of why the lake was created.
Be thankful for those toxins, so that you might learn how to filter them.

