So right now I want to do some writing. I want to just get some words out on
the page.

I will probably, very soon, go downstairs and work on the bike. I feel as
though I have not done anything active in too long, and that if I don't go down
and do something that I will burst from the inside out.

So yeah. I think I will do that now actually. It's 1:50, so I can do that, come
back by 3 ish and everything will be good.

Okay, so I'm back, and it's about 3:30. I am flip flopping between continuing
the final part of my Seth and Cain story, or actually doing work. I am
hestitant to actually do work, because none of the work that needs to get done
right now is particularly attractive, and I have already done a good amount of
work today anyway, I think it is fine for me to continue to write nonsense like
this for as long as I feel like it.

So something that I want to mention is that yesterday (and now today) I
negotiated with Grace about a keyboard her husband has that he didn't want.
It's a pok3r rgb with cherry mx-brown keycaps. It types very nicely, and I have
programmed it to do some nice things for me.

I have gotten used to the way that I have to change around with the function
button, and I like that it's doing what I expect it to do when I program it. I
have gotten to the point where using the arrow keys, home/end, and page up/down
are all rather seamless, and it's becoming something like second nature to do
that. I have also updated win+space to be the menu button.

So with all of that being said, I'm not sure how much I like th ebrown switchs.
I'm not sure if they will grow on me or not. I feel like my max speed on these
is slower than with the reds, and I also feel that I have to pound on the keys
to get the actuation force to trigger. It's quite obnoxious.

I think what I have to do in order to get more comfortable with this board
would be to type on it really slowly for some time.

I'm going to try that right now with some passage from tolkien.

I will hop over to practice now.

Okay, so I am back from practice, and I am not sure if that did me any good or
not. On the one hand, I did get quite a few words in as far as typing is
concerned (over 800 to be exact) but I don't know in what time frame I did
that, and I don't know with what sort of accuracy.

Of course, I don't really care that much about these things beyond their
usefulness as a heuristic control. I can use this data to determine what I like
or don't like about this keyboard, and the fact that it's pretty useless to me
otherwise is besides the point.

So that being said, I want to practice some Seth and Cain now. I will return,
maybe.

