So last night I had a dream, and I was working at my desk, and Kyle was
working as a new hire at Alliant, and he was working on a case, and there were
quite a few people involved in making sure the case worked right. I was sitting
in my corner, and I was doing something like sorting out my directory system,
or something else that was somewhat derivative, but could be passed off as
actual work.

As Kyle is working, Caitlin and Kaley were behind me, and they are walking past
me to Kyle to see if they can help, but there are already many people helping
Kyle, so they don't. Instead, Caitlin asks me first, what I am doing, and I
tell her plainly what I am doing, then asks me if I think that Kyle will ever
get the knack of Alliant like I have. I tell her that I'm not sure, and that
I'm not sure what is entirely going on with him, but that I'm pretty sure that
I know what he could do to fix his problem, but that there are already so many
people intervening that I don't want to intervene.

Lisa is there as well, and she tells me that I'm worth twice as much as I am
being payed right now, and that I should ask for a raise.

Also a dream last night, I was driving home from work, in a weird topsy turvy
sort of version of 114, and as I go home, instead of going north on 114 I go
south for a bit, then I turn off, and I go to a sort of community center. At
this community center is a guy who offers yoga and judo classes. Kyle and I
decide to attend one of these classes. We start by doing some elaborate lunges
around the room, and I think to myself, "These are really obnoxcious to do."
and the guy says that they are, but the more that they are done, the less they
will feel obnoxcious, which is good. So I keep doing these elaborate lunges,
and then we get into a judo technique, which involves taking a guy down.

After we're done, I ask him about the technique, and the guy says that, when he
asked Collin about BJJ, he told him to do some convoluted X-guard nonsense from
the bottom, and then he said that, with all due respect, that this is not the
way you would handle a standing attacker. I agreed, and we both agreed that
it's an error of BJJ to think that doing something from the bottom makes sense
in that sort of situation.

I then asked him what his drop-in fee is, and at this the guy became somewhat
warry. I asked him if everything is okay, and he said that this is a community
gathering, and that there aren't really drop-in fees. I then asked him if it
was actually okay that we dropped in, and he said that it's supposed to be just
for the people in that district, which we were not in, but that it's okay,
because he doesn't usually get many people to show up.

I remember then driving back to my apartment on the winding roads. Back at the
apartment, I remember my mom and dad being there. It was like we were on
vacation or something. What was happenenig was, this was the first vacation my
parents decided to go on since my dad was diagnosed, and they had a back up
plan for my dad to go to the ranch if things started acting up, and there he
could be by himself away from people. Well, my mom confided in me, and told me
that we were at this point.

As they are going, my dad asks me about setting up some games that he could
play. He tells me that Kyle and Evan set him up on Diablo III, but that that
game wasn't really what he wanted. I then said that I know he played Diablo II
before, and that he might like that, or he could play Warcraft III, which I
said that I enjoyed playing. He agreed, and I worked to install both of the
games for him.
