So right now I just want to talk a little bit about where I am right now and
So right now I just want to talk a little bit about where I am right now and
what it is that I am doing.

Right now, I am sitting at my desk and I am writing into a keyboard. Yes, this
might seem obvious, but it's important for me to write it down so that the
reader has a mental picture of what it is that they are looking at.

Once the reader has that mental picture, I then want to talk with them about
why it is that I am choosing to write on this particular Tuesday morning at
early in the morning (before 8).

So, as I mentioned yesterday (and I see no obligation for the reader to check
yesterday's journal article unless they are dreadfully curious), I am torturing
myself over this decision to walk in to the front office of my apartment
complex and announce my declaration to move out.

Yesterday, I thought it was today that was the last day of my lease. However, I
just looked at it again today, expecting to see five seven, which is todays
date, but instead I saw five nine, which is thursday. This means that I have
another two whole days to procrastinate walking in to that office.

I have payed a past due amount that I didn't realize I owed, so that was good.
Also, in work, I have gotten to a point where I know my proof of concept works
on a case I am working on, so I can transition to actually putting it into
testing today and get that done within a blink.

So with all of those anxieties squared away, let's start to talk about more
interesting things.

Firstly, I want to mention that at Half Price books the other day, I found an
edition of Tolstoy's Anna Karenina that was translated by a duo that I had
never heard of before, and it got me dreadfully curious about it, so I decided
that I must purchase it and check it out and see how I liked it.

Well, of course, having never read Anna Karenina before, but knowing to some
extent that the plot involved family drama and infidelity, I picked up this
translation and started reading.

So the first thing I noticed is that, in spite of the fact that the whole thing
is something like seven hundred pages long, it is divided up in to two halves,
each half containing four parts. Each part contains something around thrity
chapters, and each chapter is usually around something like two to five pages
long. It's rare that a chapter will span longer than a half dozen pages.

With all of that being said, it is very easy to pick up and read this novel
with the intention of only reading a little bit, but before you know it, you
catch yourself saying, "well that chapter isn't the best stopping point, maybe
the next one is" and then you read the next, and you say the same thing to
yourself, until it's late and your mind tells you that you need to fall asleep
instead of read another chapter.

Well, that's what happened to me last night, as I sat on the balcony and read.
I made it about twenty five chapters in before I fell asleep.

I forget exactly what was happening, but I want to recap what I remember.

So the novel opens with the famous line "Every happy family is alike, but
every unhappy family is unhappy in it's own unique way."

So with that, we immideatly focus in on the Oblonsky family. Mr Stiva Oblonsky
cheated on his wife Dolly and she is dreadfully upset about it. He feels
terrible about the whole ordeal, but doesn't feel particularly repentant about
it, which is what she recognizes and refuses to forgive in him.

The opening scene is of Dolly storming out while Stiva wait's for his sister,
Anna, to visit. He wrote to her informing her of the infidelity, and she is on
her way.

Before she arrives, though, we then spend some time to talk about Dolly's
sister (and I must confess, I had to look at a family tree to double check the
relation) and her love triangle with the boy Levin (foil to Oblonsky and a
friend of his) and the military stud Vronksy.

Initially, it seems as though Kitty and Vronsky will make the obvious pair,
with Levin left out to dry.

After introducing to the particulars of these characters, Tolstoy then
introduces us to Anna at the train station. At the train station, a man fell on
the tracks and dies, which I presume is totally not at all foreshadowing in any
way. Anna is described through the eyes of Kitty, who idolizes her. Kitty sees
"Big Sister-in-law Annie" (my words, not Tolstoy's) as something of a goddess.

They all go to a ball together, where the group share dances. This is about the
point where I fell asleep. I forget if I even finished the ball.

So it's very clear at this point how Tolstoy likes to write.

Like I mentioned before, the novel itself is divided up in to a bunch of these
little chapters, and each chapter is something like a bite sized morsel that
you can pinch off and chew.

The thing is, these morsel's are also incrediably rich. We have to remind
ourselves that Tolstoy had to write this story out. Where his inspiration for
it came from, who is to say, but irrespective of that, with nineteenth century
technology, Tolstoy had to choose every word and have a typesetter place it on
a page somewhere to be mass produced in publications. So each of these "little
morsels" contains quite a good deal of Russian word play that I am sure gives
translators the greatest joy in disagreement and arguments over the most
appropiate translations.

The thing is, though, I could spend as much time reading this piece of shit
novel as Tolstoy spent writing it, but already I am growing disinterested in
the characters, and what happens to them. I know Anna ends up having an affair
with the military stud, and that Kitty ends up with the good ole boy, but
beyond that, I don't really know. I think Mr. Karanin gets sick or something,
and he also cheats on Anna at some point, or something.

There is a lot of things that happen, and all of them I'm sure are dramatic.

But that I suppose is the thing. When I am reading Tolstoy, I have to think it
terms of the dramatic. Like, every little piece of story has to be relished and
savored in order to proprely savor Tolstoy, but I don't want to do that, not
only because I dont want to take the time to savor and relish every word of a
translated version of a ninetheenth century russian periodical compliation, but
also because I am finding that, while the story is interesting enough to
captivate my interest for the time being, I don't find myself singing Tolstoy's
praises from the mountaintops by any stretch of the imagination.

So, with all of that being said, I anticipate that it will take me a few more
weeks at this pace to finish the work.

I could do a similar analysis to Elantris, but instead, I think I will do some
reading for it.

--

So it's in the evening now, and I suddenly feel, no longer stranger to the
world, but instead as an extension of the rest of the world. And the next prat,
which we must see, is greatly difficult, is that there is no error involved.

Okay, so i just wrote that because I have this youtube video playlist playing.
In order to get used to adding links and such to documents like this, I wish to
add it to this document.

In fact, what I think I want to do is work on something like a previewer for
this entire extravaganza.

What that means is that I need to go hop over to Neo vim, and see how versitile
it is.

Brb
what it is that I am doing.

Right now, I am sitting at my desk and I am writing into a keyboard. Yes, this
might seem obvious, but it's important for me to write it down so that the
reader has a mental picture of what it is that they are looking at.

Once the reader has that mental picture, I then want to talk with them about
why it is that I am choosing to write on this particular Tuesday morning at
early in the morning (before 8).

So, as I mentioned yesterday (and I see no obligation for the reader to check
yesterday's journal article unless they are dreadfully curious), I am torturing
myself over this decision to walk in to the front office of my apartment
complex and announce my declaration to move out.

Yesterday, I thought it was today that was the last day of my lease. However, I
just looked at it again today, expecting to see five seven, which is todays
date, but instead I saw five nine, which is thursday. This means that I have
another two whole days to procrastinate walking in to that office.

I have payed a past due amount that I didn't realize I owed, so that was good.
Also, in work, I have gotten to a point where I know my proof of concept works
on a case I am working on, so I can transition to actually putting it into
testing today and get that done within a blink.

So with all of those anxieties squared away, let's start to talk about more
interesting things.

Firstly, I want to mention that at Half Price books the other day, I found an
edition of Tolstoy's Anna Karenina that was translated by a duo that I had
never heard of before, and it got me dreadfully curious about it, so I decided
that I must purchase it and check it out and see how I liked it.

Well, of course, having never read Anna Karenina before, but knowing to some
extent that the plot involved family drama and infidelity, I picked up this
translation and started reading.

So the first thing I noticed is that, in spite of the fact that the whole thing
is something like seven hundred pages long, it is divided up in to two halves,
each half containing four parts. Each part contains something around thrity
chapters, and each chapter is usually around something like two to five pages
long. It's rare that a chapter will span longer than a half dozen pages.

With all of that being said, it is very easy to pick up and read this novel
with the intention of only reading a little bit, but before you know it, you
catch yourself saying, "well that chapter isn't the best stopping point, maybe
the next one is" and then you read the next, and you say the same thing to
yourself, until it's late and your mind tells you that you need to fall asleep
instead of read another chapter.

Well, that's what happened to me last night, as I sat on the balcony and read.
I made it about twenty five chapters in before I fell asleep.

I forget exactly what was happening, but I want to recap what I remember.

So the novel opens with the famous line "Every happy family is alike, but
every unhappy family is unhappy in it's own unique way."

So with that, we immideatly focus in on the Oblonsky family. Mr Stiva Oblonsky
cheated on his wife Dolly and she is dreadfully upset about it. He feels
terrible about the whole ordeal, but doesn't feel particularly repentant about
it, which is what she recognizes and refuses to forgive in him.

The opening scene is of Dolly storming out while Stiva wait's for his sister,
Anna, to visit. He wrote to her informing her of the infidelity, and she is on
her way.

Before she arrives, though, we then spend some time to talk about Dolly's
sister (and I must confess, I had to look at a family tree to double check the
relation) and her love triangle with the boy Levin (foil to Oblonsky and a
friend of his) and the military stud Vronksy.

Initially, it seems as though Kitty and Vronsky will make the obvious pair,
with Levin left out to dry.

After introducing to the particulars of these characters, Tolstoy then
introduces us to Anna at the train station. At the train station, a man fell on
the tracks and dies, which I presume is totally not at all foreshadowing in any
way. Anna is described through the eyes of Kitty, who idolizes her. Kitty sees
"Big Sister-in-law Annie" (my words, not Tolstoy's) as something of a goddess.

They all go to a ball together, where the group share dances. This is about the
point where I fell asleep. I forget if I even finished the ball.

So it's very clear at this point how Tolstoy likes to write.

Like I mentioned before, the novel itself is divided up in to a bunch of these
little chapters, and each chapter is something like a bite sized morsel that
you can pinch off and chew.

The thing is, these morsel's are also incrediably rich. We have to remind
ourselves that Tolstoy had to write this story out. Where his inspiration for
it came from, who is to say, but irrespective of that, with nineteenth century
technology, Tolstoy had to choose every word and have a typesetter place it on
a page somewhere to be mass produced in publications. So each of these "little
morsels" contains quite a good deal of Russian word play that I am sure gives
translators the greatest joy in disagreement and arguments over the most
appropiate translations.

The thing is, though, I could spend as much time reading this piece of shit
novel as Tolstoy spent writing it, but already I am growing disinterested in
the characters, and what happens to them. I know Anna ends up having an affair
with the military stud, and that Kitty ends up with the good ole boy, but
beyond that, I don't really know. I think Mr. Karanin gets sick or something,
and he also cheats on Anna at some point, or something.

There is a lot of things that happen, and all of them I'm sure are dramatic.

But that I suppose is the thing. When I am reading Tolstoy, I have to think it
terms of the dramatic. Like, every little piece of story has to be relished and
savored in order to proprely savor Tolstoy, but I don't want to do that, not
only because I dont want to take the time to savor and relish every word of a
translated version of a ninetheenth century russian periodical compliation, but
also because I am finding that, while the story is interesting enough to
captivate my interest for the time being, I don't find myself singing Tolstoy's
praises from the mountaintops by any stretch of the imagination.

So, with all of that being said, I anticipate that it will take me a few more
weeks at this pace to finish the work.

I could do a similar analysis to Elantris, but instead, I think I will do some
reading for it.

--

So it's in the evening now, and I suddenly feel, no longer stranger to the
world, but instead as an extension of the rest of the world. And the next prat,
which we must see, is greatly difficult, is that there is no error involved.

Okay, so i just wrote that because I have this youtube video playlist playing.
In order to get used to adding links and such to documents like this, I wish to
add it to this document.

In fact, what I think I want to do is work on something like a previewer for
this entire extravaganza.

What that means is that I need to go hop over to Neo vim, and see how versitile
it is.

Brb
