So last night, I masterbated. Today I did not masterbate, but I sat in my chair
naked. Tomorrow I masterbated, after I got home from my parents, if I even go
te my parents. I just want the court to know, and make aware, my masterbation
schedule to everyone around me. I want others to know when I masterbate. I
believe, that your ordained minister the judge of sir francis peter himself,
the people should know on what days I have been masterbating, in case the court
would like to use that information in the proceedings here. I have created a
persona, I have named him Brett Webster, and I have presented what I think is
the Best Representaiton of "Him" that I can perform. So I would like ,"Him"
(being, Brett Webster) to come forward and say, I masterbate nearly every day.
About five times a week is my norm. Beyond that, I generally masterbate at
night, but I have been known to masterbate occasionally in the mid afternoon on
weekends. Beyond that, my mastebation ritual consists of browsing reddit for
girls on /r/gonewild, and after I have done that for about 2 minutes or so, I
decide to move to either Youporn or 4chan.org/s. On youporn I usually look for
mommy stuff, and on 4chan I usually look for a thread that has been long
running for AI Shinkozaki. All I know about her is that she is a Gravuere,
model, and there is a certain group of people on 4chan that are obsessed with
her. I never post, because fuck that, but I find her material generally always
modest, but very provacative, but in the best of ways. I find it fascintaing
not only that someone with a life like Ai Shinozaki's exist, but that there are
many genuinely amazing people that are obsessed with gathering her photos and
orgazizing them as much as possible. Her material is always just really good,
and I dependally find something new from her, even if it's just a new color on
a different set, that never ceases to entrance me. Beyond that, I just find
what I want to finish to, and when I get to a point that seems appropiate,
which is either 5 to about 15 minutes later, I ejaculate. That's my
masterbation ritual. I would like the court to admit this as evidence for my
case. It is the most honest representation of how to display my masterbation
habits. I might even consider charts at some point. I would have liked to show
you the number of times I masterbated during this time frame.


Also, I just want to say, I'm not too fond of the fact that I had to come into
your stupid place over a dozen god damn times. I've been to Denton twice now,
that's 10 hours in jail and a 3500 dollar bail, as well as 11 times to
lewisville to pee in a cup, and twice to get my hair chopped off. Everything
has come back clean. So fuck you for making me show you that. I understand it,
but at the very least, I just want you to recognize that I masterbated more
frequenctly these past 6 months than I have in the past year before that. So
this step, while educational, was really not healthy, and I am of the opinion
that, since weed is going to be legal in 2030 anyway, I have commited nothing
wrong, and would like permission to smoke weed in the privacy of my own
apartment.

Of course, you may deny this request, but I don't really care. As long as we
both understand eachother when we say that I have shown that I can abstain from
marijuana. I am most clearly able to do that, and I would like for you to get
off my back now about anything else that doesn't concern you constituionally.
This felony and misdemeanor will be expunged off of my record, and I will do my
best to be a well and outstanding citizen of your nation.

Notice I say it's your nation, and not mine. And no, I'm not some heroic
sacrifice to your cause. I am just a man that would like some time to himself,
and would like to genuinely contribute to whatever society he is born in. The
fact that I live in this body means I need to pay some tribute to my people and
the stuff of all that.

So yeah. What I am saying is, if I am allowed to live in your nation and pursue
the hobbies that I would like to pursue, given that I am not harming anyone to
the most reasonable extent of the phrase, of coruse, but still, whatever, I
wanted, I would say, "Great, I have proven to you that I can abstain from
marijuana for some time. You're welcome. Now please get off my back." If I'm
allowed to say that, then we understand eachother. That is all.


