So this  is a story all about how my life got twist turned upside down and I'd
like to take a minute just sit right there I'll tell youa all about how I
became the fresh prince of bel air.

So for real though, what I want to be able to do is take my stream of
conscousness and transmit it directly onto this machine. That way, I can do
things like write blogs and journal articles and diary entries and all sorts of
stuff. and not have to thkni about what is going on beneath my fingers. So
yeah, when I g et to that point, it will be a good day, I can feel as though I
am getting close to that point, but it is really just a meter of time before I
totally get there. It's difficult to do, and it takkes a lot of practice. I lke
doing it though, it's just a matter of doing so in a way where I stay
comfortable.. I will say, I do not lke the way this keyboard I am uisng is so
slanted to the left. I want to get a 69% keyboard at some point, but I haven't
done my research on twhere to find them and how much they cost and cet etc. .

Regardless, there are a few things I want to say, The first thing is that I
think Ros Namajunes is one of the most gorgeous individuals I have ever met.
Like, absolutely stunning individual. It's absurd really. And I mean that in
the least sexual way possible. In fact, I would go so far te say that my
thoughts about rose are such that I would remove any feeling of sex about her
because that really obscures the kind of human being she is. She is so beautful
in so many ways, it's quite amazing to be honest.

To start, she is an amazing fighter. She cut her hair for practicality reasons,
she doesn't wear heels because it doesn't make sense for her to, she wears
loose pants and comfortable shooes.Everything about her is absolutely spot on.
She has the most genuine heart, the strongest soul of any individual I have
seen, and speaks with the most sincerity for herself and the poule around her
and the human race as a whole. I am absolutely blown away by her heart and her
soul, and her mind, and her body. Everything about this human being is
stunning. 

That only scatches the surface too. She eembodies everything that is good in
the world, and her charcter is what everyone should be actively seeking every
day to what she seekxs. It's in that constant search for the best version of
ourselves that we find the best version of ourselves. But only for glimpses.
The window into the soul is always dynamic, and one should always understand
how that window lies in with reality.



# 20180627

So I am getting to a point in my life where I feel like my life is becoming a
really interesting story, a story that will be worth telling in perhaps
autobiographical format at some point. However, and this is a difficulty that I
have had in the past with my tale of Delita, and that is my memory of things is
not quite clear on certain details of the story that can sometimes be very
relevent to how things play out. And even if my memory is totally correct, the
act of actively trying to conjure up memories of things that happened even just
two years in the past is proving to be difficult, and one can only imagine that
conjuring up memories like this is sure to have so hindsight 20 20 glasses
going on, so this is my attempt to acheive a few things.

One, I want to write more. I have just gotten to the point where I can think
words in dvorak and they come out onto my fingers in pretty quick pace, so I
want to harness that and really make my typing ability become ingrained into my
subconscious so that I can really reap the benefits of switching keyboard
layouts. On top of that, I want to get used to the idea of writing down things
that might seem very long or very perhaps even cumbersome, but when read back
don't take very long to read. That is something I have noticed is that, when I
write, I write in very consice thoughts, and I'm afriad to venture to far on
tangents because when you write a tangent, it seems like you are on that
tangent for a very long time because writing take a very long time to do in
comparison to thinking or reading, but when you read it back it feels
disjointed because I don't stay on those tangents for very long, and the reader
is left to wonder why the writer is constanly cutting all of his tangents
short. It makes it seem as though I want to say something but that I am
constantly going back to the thing I stemmed from, which, like I said, creates
very disjointed and disorienting writing.

The second, is that I want to remember these things, my feelings, emotions,
thoughts, and etc, as they are still fresh in my memory. This journal is not
intended as a thereputic tool (although, surely it can be used as such in
certain times, and any journal and writing in general is always in a way
thereputic) but instead as a reflective one, a tool I can use to create a sort
of imprint of my emotions, of my actions, and of the events that happen to me
and those around me. I want this to be a sort of picture, a video of my life,
but this is better than a video because the reader consuming this medium has
access to the inner thoughts and emotions that go on inside of my head, where
as a consumer of video would have to infer that from the video being watched.
In a way, it is worse because the truth can be distorted through the lens of my
writing, but I will do my best to keep this metaphorical mirror as flat and
clean as possible, perhaps even making note of the places where the mirror may
be smudged or distorted so that the reader will know when something that is
being written is my perception of the truth rather than the raw unfiltered
facts of what happened.

So all of that out of the way, this first article will be a bit of a doozy, and
will be uncharacteristic of what I want this to be. What I want this to be is
my thoughts and emotions of the events of the day before, written in the
morning of the following day, in a way that puts the context of the day before
into my philosophical musings of this current day. However, I feel it neccesary
to start today with a whole background of what has happened to me over the past
8 months, since the day I got that phone call from my mother that my father was
diagonosed with Luekemia. But then that goes against the spirit of what I just
said, as if I went over that past 8 months, I would be conjuring up feelings
and emotions over those 8 months rather than reflecting on my current thoughts
and feelings of what is going on right now, so I am left in a bit of a quandry.
I think the best way to resolve this is to simply start at the start where I am
right now, and to go over the background of other things in my life before this
journal was started as they seem appropiate. So let's do that.

So I am currently section 2 part 1 chapter 1 of "The Brothers Karamazov".
Currently I have two translations of that novel by, one being the etext version
that I make annotiations in, translated by Constance Garrett, and the other is
the "everyman edition" or some such, that I bought at the store some weeks ago,
and is another translation by two individuals who I forget their names at the
moment. I have also just recently, this past weekend (so 4 days ago now) bought
a tablet to read on, and I have been reading on this tablet for the past few
days now, and I am liking that method quite a lot.

All of that preface to say, the themes and motivations of those characters, and
the events that happen to them, greatly remind me a lot of the various aspects
of myself. I read (I think on reddit somewhere) that when Dicken's and
Dostoeyevsky met (or maybe they didn't meet, and Dos. was simply commenting on
Dicken's words) Dickens said that he feels that he has two people inside of
him, always at opposition to eachother, and that each of these two people
together makes up the whole of who he is as a person, to which Dos. replied
"only two?" Indeed, I feel quite the same way as the Russian in this respect,
and I can see this sort of notion in a very crystal clear sort of way expressed
in the Brothers K. I very much have inside myself an Aloysha, but I also have
inside of me a Dmitri, and as much as I don't want it to be the case (and I
think most everyone would agree on this point) I have a bit of Fyodor in me as
well.

And to get to the point I am really trying to make, in the story right now,
the action is rising, Mitya has stomped the head in of his father, and Aloysha
is acting as a mediator between all of the crucial characters of the novel
(which creates a very cool dynamic of the story) and at the end of the day, as
Aloysha goes back to the monestary to rest for the night, he learns that Father
Zossima, his mentor and perhaps his true father figure in the story (if you
insist on analyzing it as such), is in poor health and will indeed come to his
death in the very near future. Aloysha, knowing this, talks about how he feels
his place is in the monestary, with the father, and that all other wordly
responsibities don't matter in comparison to the illness of this Zossima.

This feeling is much similar to the feeling I feel right now. Currently, two
days ago, my little brother Evan has finished his donation of stem cells, and
the process of transplanting the cells into my father (excuse my crudeness in
terms here, there is surely a much more elegent and scientific way of saying
this) has just begun. My father was admitted into UTSouthwestern a week ago,
where he was administered chemeo in some amount throughout the week in
preperation of this transfusion. This is a sort of end cap on the entire
process that has gone on for the past 8 months, my father having had 8
treatment of chemeo in that, along with regular appointments, spinal taps, and
other things which I feel guilty not knowing the full details of. And it is at
this end cap that I have this feeling that my place is with my father. I have
this feeling for two reasons, one being scarier than the other. The first
reason is because I feel that this process is difficult, and that as much
support as my father can get can only help, and that it is my responibility to
give him that support. The second, scarier reason, is that my father may die in
this process, and if he does, that means that there are things about our
relationship that I can never right. That is the scarier thing.

And that is where I come at this weird conflicting feelings. Obviously, the
death of my father is a scary thing, and any reasonable sane person when asked
if they would be okay with the event of the death of a their father would
obviously say they would rather their father not die, and that they would
prefer if he would keep on living. However, my emotions in this instance are
different, and are something I have been struggling with pretty much ever since
he was diagonsed. You see, what worries me more about his death is not the
actual grief of his death itself (although for sure I know I will experience at
least some grief, even if it is fleeting and not at all like what I imagine it
might feel like) but instead the anguish at having his death come to a point
where I feel our relationship is on a cliffhanger. My father and I have had a
very strange relationship over the past few years, not even talking about my
childhood, which I'm sure a hypnotist could find some buried thoughts and
memories and emotions of things that I have tucked away in there, but just in
the past few years we have been in a weirld place that is hard to describe. I
still have moments where I have lingering hatred (perhaps hatred is too strong
a word) resentment, bitterness, and overall distaste for him. I have moments
where I think to who he is, how I was raised (by both him and my mother), and
how we interact, and I have displeasure in our relationship, and these moments
where in the past have been simply me being dissatissfied with the relationship
and nothing more, now are associated with moments of guilt as I have these
thoughts, these thoughts of a man who is fighting against a terrible disease, a
man who is fighting it as he fights everything else in his life, and needs my
support and my love.

And the truly conflicting thing is, these thoughts have even gone so far as to
give me a sense of "well fuck him anyway". This is the truely disconcerting
thing. I have had thoughts that, well maybe he doesn't get past it, and that's
where the story of my relationship with my father ends, and maybe I'm okay with
that. I have never gone so far as to entertain the idea that "well maybe he
does deserve it" as certainly, though I do have these qualms about my father, I
don't believe that any human no matter how vile ever "deserves" anything, and
even if the concept of one human deserving something were a reasonable one, my
father would certainly not be one who would deserve the treatment he has
received by this disease in the least. Indeed, let it be known, though I have
my troubles and my issues with my fathers actions towards me and our
relationship, and I have my issues with his ideaology, and how he lives his
life and the choices he has made through it, I know that truely deep down he is
not a bad man, and quite on the contrary I know that he has a very strong sense
of selfless giving towards his family, which includes me his son of course, and
I don't want to say that I know he loves us, because the word love doesn't mean
much of anything without context, but I know that his sense of giving towards
family is strong, perhaps the strongest thing that he feels. Of course I am
only speculating, but this is something inside of me that I know to be true,
and I can only know it to be true in having this relationship of father and
son.

However, I still have these reservations, these feelings of anomosity towards
him, lingering from my own actions and our relationship as it evolved over the
past six or so years through my time in college and afterward. Of course, I
know these thoughts are simply thoughts I cannot help in myself, and that all of
my thoughts are the consequences of my upbringing, my life, and of the universe
that provides and generates all things.

Still, the point in all of this is that there is still a discord in the
relationship between me and my father. In fact I have talked with my mother
more than with my father about this relationship, and this is only something
that can't be talked about, but will only come in time. But now that the
possibility of time is limited, now that it's unsure whether time will persist
past this transplant, this is where my feelings come from, and this is where it
comes back full cicle to the protagonist Aloysha, who feels he should be with
his Father Zossima in his last days and with nothing else. I feel my place now
is visiting my father, I need to see him, to be with him. Is it selfish? Do I
want this simply so that I don't have to live with the idea that if he does
die, I will be able to tell myself I did all I could to get things in a less
disconcordant way than I would otherwise? I don't think it is selfish. Seattle
Brett might have treated this moment selfishly (and I do still hold that
everything we do as human beings in done selfishly in a certian sense) but now
I know it in myself that my feelings of needing to be with my father come from
something else, something apart from me. Of course, it is not apart from me,
but it comes from my meditation of this world, the observance of my thoughts,
not from trying to control my thoughts. It is this observer, who observes this
feeling, this feeling of needing to be with my father. I know intellectually
the selfish reasons for wanting to visit him more, which is why the thoughts
could appear in the first place, but the thoughts and feelings appeared quite
on their own, without the guidance of the ego and it is simply the observance
of them that I am feeling now.

I made a visit this past sunday, four days ago, and I actually visited twice
with a session of Bikram Yoga sandwiched in between. I want to make time to
visit him, but there are so many other things I want to pursue in my life right
now that it makes finding time for it difficult. However, this feeling is
strong, and I am glad, as my heart has been eased on one point having visited
him. When I visited, the nurse there had to administer a Lovanox shot to him,
which he had to do for me after my incident at the hospital, and that got us to
talking about my experince. Something I've said a few times, is that in a way
it's much easier to be on that side than it is to be on this side, and I hold
to that, although for me I was only on that side for a few days, where as he is
on that side, and has been for over eight months now, but we got to talking
about that again, and my dad can agree to an extent. I then mentioned something
which I have said before I know to my mom, and maybe to my dad as well, I don't
remember, but I said it during my visit this past Sunday, that I wish I would
have told them at the time of my incident, but I knew I was going to be okay.
And the way I put it was, "I don't if it was foolishness, or false knowledge, or
where that knowledge came from, but I knew that my numbness was temporary,
that it didn't feel permanent, and that I knew I would get back the use of my
left arm, and that I wish I would have told my parents that, because it seemed
so obvious to me that it was temporary, and I didn't know that they were so
worried about that." And to that, my father replied, that he knows too that he
will get through this transfusion as well. And the way he put it, he put in a
way that I know was not false, he spoke candidly, in reply to my words of
course, but that, in spite of the percentages and prognosises that people give
of him, he knows that he will survive through this. It's true, it's genuine, or
at least, it's as true and genuine as I know it can be being on this side of
the disease and not that one, and the doubts I have been having that perhaps he
might not make it through this (for indeed I have had doubts that I haven't
talked about in this article, but they are there), doubts which I have known
and I wish to false, those doubts I can at least supress in good conscious.
Yes, I felt guilty supressing those doubts before the visit, for fear that I
was not supressing doubts, but instead supressing a realist attitude towards
this situation, but now I know that they are true, honest to god doubts that I
feel, and I can supress them honestly, knowing they are doubts and not thoughts
of acceptance. Acceptance is important, but now is not the time for that, and
these thoughts are not thoughts of acceptance. And so I will visit, and so I
will rejoice in my life, in my feelings of "being there" (oh there must be a
better word for that), and I will rejoice in the lives that we share together.
I will continue to visit, without expectation, because that is what I feel I
need to do, not to gain anything for myself or for my father, or for anyone
else, but because I simply feel that my place is with my father.

# 20180628

So this is the beginning of my second dedicated journal article. There are a
few things that I want to go over, and I'm not sure which to start with. The
first is a dream I had, that had me waking up a little disturbed, and the
second is I already forgot what it is. Oh, right, it has to do with a text I
got from my mom. Let's start with the dream.

Okay, so today I had a most peculiar dream. Fortunately, this one did not
involve marijuana in any way (the last dream I had was a couple nights ago, and
very much had to do with marijuana, but I that one, though it might be worth
writing down, was not near as interesting phycologically as this one). The
dream started (or at least the first thing I remember about the dream) in the
parking lot of a park. This park was similar to a park I remember visiting as a
kid where we had a sort of PE session once. The parking lot was on let's say
the south end of the park (this detail is not relevent, and I am only using
south to give indications of direction) and has a sort of open field from this
lot. I am referring to strictly the dream park by the way, and I don't think
this childhood PE experience has anything to do with the dream. Anyway, from
that parking lot, it opens into a sort of open field, but it's not really fully
open as there were paths and trees and stuff, so the field wasn't open enough
to play any sort of sport on, but there was a grassy part. Across this grassy
part, parallel to the parking lot, there was a path that goes across, and
across this path from the lot, was a sparsly wooded area. Not wooded, but there
were enough trees for that to be a detail that I noticed. In the dream I don't
go past this part, so that part of the dream is not really expanded upon, but
in the dream I knew it to contain picnic tables and things, where families
might bring food and picnic things and have a nice family night out. So in this
dream, the first thing I remember is being in a suburban, similar to the
suburban my mom had when we were growing up, and I am driving this suburban. I
remember my mom being involved in the dream somehow, I think she was in the
passenger side of the vehicle, and Kyle I know was in the back seat. So I'm in
the parking lot, and I remember saying something to the effect of "hey, lets go
over to the creek side of this park, I'd like to show it to you" or something
like that. You see, this from the parking lot of this park, one could drive to
the west (again, irrelevent direction) and towards the west side of the park
it became more dense, there were different things to do, and it was the same
park as the park where families might picnic, but in this area of the park were
sports fields and things of that nature along with a bit more winding road and
such. So I drive over to that part of the park, and at some point along the
ride, I remember making the decision that we were done there and that we wanted
to go home. Instead of using my phone to find the directions home, however, I
remember thinking something like I wanted to just find the way home and I
thought I knew it. So as I start to drive through this other section of the
park, driving as if on autopilot, driving through roads without thinking as if
I had taken this path many times before, Kyle starts reading to me about
Russian pronouncations. You see, I have been learning Russian lately, but I
have only just started, and at this point I have not gone beyond learning the
alphebet, which is why this came up in the dream. So Kyle start showing me
letters, and they just appear in the dream, and I start reciting them back to
him, the way they are pronounced. And what ends up happening is, Kyle gives me
a letter, I give him back the correct answer, but Kyle then tells me it is the
wrong answer. When I question him on it, he insists that it is the wrong
answer. In fact, I remember the letters, it was ю, and я, which are "yoo" and
"ya", and I know for a fact I said something in the dream like, "I know the
backwards R one is Ya" but Kyle kept insisting that it was "ee", and I said no,
"ee" is и, but I didn't put together until just now that they are both backward
versions of other english letters, and in the dream I was just insisting that
the backward R was not the sound "ee" but "ya". I remember getting very upset
in the dream at Kyle, and eventually I made it to a dead end in the road, a
sort of dead end that was the end of a parking lot where soccer moms might park
when their child has a game at the very end of the park, and beyond the soccer
fields I know there was a densly wooded area with a creek that marked the edge
of the park, and I knew that I was lost. So at this point I decide to stop
arguing with Kyle about the russian letters, and I begin to make my way back to
the original parking lot that I mentioned when the dream first started (or
rather back to when I first remember the dream), and when I make it back to
that parking lot, I am met by my dad. I don't remember driving up to him,
(indeed, I don't remember looking out of the car when I was driving at all, and
most of my dream took place inside the scope of the suburban) but I do
remember, when I was right next to him, I pulled up beside him in a parking
spot, and he was simply standing there, and I stopped so that he could open the
passenger side door and get in the car. At this point I think my mom had
magically gotten in the back seat, since she had gone out of my memory by that
point in the dream, and so the passenger seat was open, so my dad got in, and
he was upset, as if I was not doing as I was told, and that he was displeased
with my defience, and he might have said something, but at this point in the
dream I remember conceding to looking up my home address (1700 Tulane Dr., the
address of my parents house) on my phone, and starting up the GPS. At this
point, my dad commanded me to drive home, in the stern way that he does, and
after looking up the address I placed the phone GPS beside me like I do when I
drive with the GPS and began to make my way home. As I began to leave this
parking lot of the park, and go out on the road which ran North-South, which
was just east of the park, and marked the other end of the park, is when the
dream ended.

The reason I spell out this dream is not because I think anything remarkable
happened, but when I woke I was almost in a sweat. I knew I didn't have the
time near my, but looking outside I could tell that while it certainly was
morning, I knew I had not overslept, and I had my tablet next to me, which as I
mentioned in my previous article I have recently acquired, and I went to check
if it had finished it's windows updates, because I remembered that it had to do
that recently, and also to check the time on it, and it said something like
11:38. I had a very breif moment of panic, so breif in fact that the moment of
panic did not even happen as a realized that there was no way that it was past
11, and at the very worst I thought that it could only be 7:38, and the time
was off by a timezone. Upon opening the browser, I found that it was 6:38 in
the central time zone, and at that point I began to wake for real. It was nice,
feeling that awake at that time of day, and since today is a Thrusday and I
have no obligation to make my way to the gym to practice with Paco, I had
plenty of time to collect myself, have some water, drink some juice, rotate the
laundry, and perform some morning tasks that I usually perform in a bit more
hurry (or rather, not hurry, but with a sense of guilt as my morning tasks run
in to the time that I should be at work).

What struck me about this dream though, was two things. The first is my arguing
with Kyle about russian letters, which I now understand was probably my brain
sorting out which backward english letters coorespond to which russian sounds.
The fact that I got so upset at him for that though, actually does concern me,
and I don't feel guilty about it (for how can one ever feel guilty about the
happennings of a dream?) but it did disturb me for quite some time. I also have
been meaning to spend more time learning russian, but have let other things
take precedence, in particular, reading and writing in english, which I greatly
enjoy. So I think there was a bit of apprehension and insecurity about my lack
of learning Russian in the dream as well. There is probably some significance
to the fact that it was Kyle I was getting upset at, and this dream does remind
me of one road trip back in the days when I used to play Go, and I wanted to
try my hand at blind Go during this trip, and I remember getting upset at Kyle,
because he had some sort of handheld device that he was keeping track of and
playing the stones on, and when we got to move 30 or so, I tried to play a
stone and he informed me that a stone had already been played at that position,
and I remember arguing with him that there was not a stone on that position,
and that he must have made some mistake in interpreting the moves I had given
him, because earlier, I had remembered playing in a different way. At that
point, I remember my dad making a comment that the one who could see the stones
was probably right, and maybe he was, but I disliked that my opinion on the
matter was being shrugged off so matter-of-factly, and I remember at the very
lesat thinking that, while it could be true that my memory of the board state
could very easily be wrong, I also had strong memory of playing the stone in a
different position, and not only did I have memory, but I had reasoning as to
why I would have placed that stone in the place I did, and I also knew how the
way I phrased the way the stone was placed could be mis-interpreted by Kyle,
who did not enjoy Go at all in the way I did. So at that point, as I thought to
it, I am almost certain what happened is I told him to place the stone in a
certain way in relation to the other stones (because trying to keep track of
absolute positioning I knew would be too hard for me) and Kyle misinterpreted
my words and placed the stone in the wrong location, and that created a board
state on the handheld which was different than the state in my head. All of
this ended pretty much at that point, because I remember trying to continue on,
but after about 30 stones I knew the board state would be difficult to remember
anyway, as Go board states can get very complicated rather quickly, and this
entire thing was just an attempt to handicap myself to the point where I could
even get Kyle to play with me in the first place, and I knew that he had no
real interest anyway, and that the only reason he would even humor me in that
moment was because of the boredom of a long road trip, so at that point we
dismissed the game, and I remember suggesting perhaps we play for real, but
Kyle didn't want to, and that was that.

That whole experience, and me being upset at both Kyle and in a lesser way my
dad, was the first memory that came in to my mind after I woke from my dream
today. It was probably almost exactly ten or eleven years ago that this
happened, and I am certain that this memory led to the events of the dream
today. In fact, the concept of Kyle giving me "the state of things how it is"
(either a Go board state, or the association of Russian letters to their
pronounciation) and me trying to recall that state from memory is so strikingly
similar that I feel this has to be the reason for the inclusion of Kyle in my
dream today. And also the inclusion of my father as well. That's actually
really fascinating, now that I think about it, how very similar the memory fits
the dream, but with my current task of learning Russian rather than my task of
playing a game of Go.

So yeah, most of this session has been dominated by that dream, so much so that
I haven't even got to the second part I wanted to talk about which is the text
(or rather, group text sent to me, my brothers, lacey, and Granny and Papa)
sent by my mom. The reason I find this text so interesting is a couple things.
The first is that I didn't fully understand the text at first, and actually had
to look up a word to understand really what was going on, and the second is my
reaction to it. So enough mystery about it, this is the text in it's entirety.

    Text Message
    Tuesday 11:17 AM
    Ann Webster Family

    We just had the
    blessing of the cells
    with the Chaplin and
    they are hanging the
    stem cells.

That is the exact text as it appears in my phone as of this moment. One thing I
will say is that I did not see this text until I got back from Jiu-Jitsu class
that lunch, which would have been about an hour later, and by that point,
multiple people had responded with things like "praying for you" and stuff like
that. There was also a text sent from my mom sent at 11:28 (after both her
parents had responded) saying "\*chaplian" (escape sequence mine since
markdown), which followed with a text from Lacey, also giving her prayers.

So what struck me first about this was, I when I first saw this message, it
showed up as seven messages in my phone, since it was a group message and a
bunch had already responded. (Me nor any of my brothers responded) So when I
read the first message, I didn't know what a Chaplin was, and the correction to
chaplain didn't help either. When I first read the message, I just saw
"blessing" and thought she was asking for blessings, like someone may do,
similar to how someone may ask for prayers, but upon reading it further, I
realized that it read "the blessing of the cells", so I thought maybe she was
asking for us to pray for the cells to be blessed, which I also thought was
strange, but I know both my parent but particularly my mom can be very
superstitious when it comes to religion and things of that nature. My mom is
the sort that believes in the bible literally, and takes the six thousand year
interpretation of the world to be the actual truth. I don't resent her for it
(much), but I am fascintated by it because she is otherwise a rather
intelligent woman. However, upon getting to the point where I could entirely
read the message and comprehend what it said, I noticed that "the blessing of
the cells" was an event that happened with "the Chaplin" (chaplain as she
corrected herself later) and that it was an event that happened before the
transfusion. This is all I have to go on.

Now, at this point, I very much want to say that I do not intend to bring this
up pretty much to anyone. It was one text message, and if some ass hole wants
to give his blessing to a bag of Evan's blood before an extremely delicate and
scary (there must be a better word than scary to describe the chance of 20
percent death and 50 percent prognosis, as I don't want to portray fear, but
rather the sense of, this shit is serious and must be taken seriously)
infusion, and if that blessing make my mom, and maybe my dad too, I don't know,
but definitely my mom, feel better, than so be it. I don't care of the pope
himself comes with his stupid hat kisses the rod they use to hang, as long as
the pope isn't ill and it doesn't effect the procedure in any way. However, I
did not know what I chaplain was, and had to look it up to find out that a
chaplain is like a pastor, but the word chaplain is used when he is the
religous figure of an institution such as a hospital or prison or other such
place, so that the cells were blessed by the guy who I'm sure does this shit
all the time around there.

And that is what got me to thinking, how gross and disgusting that practice is.
I'm all for giving people a sense of hope or meaning, that kind of shit is what
things like Christianity is for, it's for people who don't have an explanation
for the things that happen in the world and inside ourselves, so they come to
the lowest hanging fruit because that fruit makes sense to them, and if eating
of that fruit helps them cope, or deal, or otherwise make better of their lives
in a positive way, than who am I to say that the fruit isn't there and that
it's the product of thousands of years of in-factual cultural evolution?
However, it's not the actual blessing of the cells which disgusts me, it's the
concept that somehow this chaplain has more right, or more capability, or more
divinity with the lord that he should do it rather than someone close to the
people involved. This is how this ass hole makes his living, is by telling
people that he is able to bless their cells, and that the lord will guide the
doctors hands, and he will use this farce to give hope to people in desperate
situations, and that's how he makes his living. It's fucking gross. Like
despicably gross.

And obviously, even bringing up the topic of this text message would be wrong
to do with my family, even my brothers. Perhaps Jason would be the only one I
would come close to saying anything to, but he and I aren't close enough that
something as trival as this text message that we both received would be a topic
of conversation that he and I would have together. So instead this is something
that will most likely never be discuss except long in the future when my dad
has recovered and I bring it up in a conversation over dinner or something, and
even then it the topic of religion is still such a touchy one, even with my
mom, that we are all wise enough to avoid the subject completely. So this is
what I'm left with.

I could go on a little bit, but I'm over my time and I have to get back to
work, so I will leave it at that. It just gives me a strange sense of discord,
not only my opinion of this text message and also my reaction to it and the
fact that I can't rectify it by bringing it up. It's amazing how utterly wrong
and disgusted it makes me feel over something that shouldn't be that big of a
deal. And it's not that big of a deal, I can very easily move on with my life,
but this is just one more thing about religion and my parents that will never
be aligned, and it makes me want to vomit. That is all.

Until next time.
