Snape went to Lupin's office to give him the potion, but saw the map. Snape
then silences Lupin with his wand and points it at Black.

Black plaeds to Snape to look at Ron's rat. Harry get's between Snape and
Lupin. Snape threatens Harry, but Harry, with Hermione and Ron, disarm Snape.
He gets knocked back unconcious.

Black then takes Scabbers, and reveals how he knows that Scabbers is Peter. He
saw in the prophet Ron's trip to egypt, and saw Scabbers with the missing
finger. Peter yelled that Sirius betrayed Lily and James, blew up everything
around him, cut off his finger, and ran into the sewers.

Crookshanks is a smart cat, and it took a while for Black and him to trust
eachother, but Crookshanks is responisble for all of Black's entrances to
Hogwarts. Black says that he convinced James and Lily to use Peter as their
secret keeper at the last minute.

Lupin says that to clear it up, he can force Scabbers to reveal himself. Black
and Lupin cast a spell which turns Scabbers into Peter.

Pettigrew then starts to give his side of the story. He says he knew Black
would escape and try to kill him again. Black says he convinced James and Lily
to make Peter the secret keeper because he knew Voldemort would come after him.
Voldemort would have never guessed Peter. But Peter was a servent of Voldemort.

Hermione brings up the fact that Scabbers hasn't harmed Harry all this time,
and Black counters by saying that it's because there would be nothing in for
him.

Hermione asks Black how he got out of Azkaban without Black Magic. Dementors
can't see, and didn't bother him as much as a dog. Then, when he saw Peter on
the loose, it gave him enough strength to slip past the dementors as a dog.

Lupin and Black and now convinced, reunited, about the story, and that Peter is
the true spy.

Peter pleads to Ron, then Hermione, then Harry, and when Lupin and Black
threaten him together, he admits his fear of Voldemort. He was a coward, only
after his own skin, acting as a spy rather than stand up to Voldemort.

As they are about to kill him, Harry gets in the way. Harry doesn't want to
kill him.

Lupin binds him up. They agree, that if he transforms, they will kill him.

They then make all the neccesary precautions, and agree to gtfo, binding
Petigrew, and Snape.
