There is hubbub in the tower, and searchs everywhere. The fat lady is restored
to her place, with trolls as bodyguards. The secret passage to Hogsmeade is
kept unguarded.

Ron becomes something of a hero for a time. They wonder why Black didn't kill
all of them after Ron yelled.

Neville gets a howler from his Grandmother. He is punished quite harshly for
his mistake.

They get a note from Hagrid, who wants to visit. Hagrid mostly wants to talk
about Hermione. She has been visiting him a lot because she feels lonely and
ostracized. Ron is still upset about Scabbers.

Harry and Ron talk about sneaking Harry into Hogsmeade again. Hermione says
she'll report Harry if he does, and Ron tells her off again.

As Harry tries to sneak past teh witch statue, he runs into Neville, and then
Snape. Harry and Neville shake off Snape, and Harry shakes off Neville, and
goes back to the statue.

Harry meets Ron with teh invisibility cloak on. They visit some places in
Hogsmeade. They go past teh Shrieking Shack, which is boarded up.

While there, Ron comes across Malfoy. Harry can't resist but toy with him by
throuwing mud at him from the cover of the invisiblity cloak. As he is toying,
Crabbe trips over the cloak, and for a split second, Harry is revealed. The
damage is done, and Harry makes a break for the castle.

Harry leaves the cloak in the passage, and comes outside to find Snape. Snape
takes Harry to his office and berates him. Snape then mocks Harry's dad, and
Harry snapes again. Harry mentions that James saved Snape's life, and Snape
reveals that it was a trick that would have killed Snape that James came to his
conscious at the last minute.

Snape then gets a hold of some incrimanating candy from Hogsmeade and the map.
He tries to reveal the map, after Harry doesn't want him to throw it in the
fire, and all he succeeds in doing is getting a bunch of notes that insult him.
He summons Lupin.

Lupin then talks about the map, and covers Harry's ass. Ron bursts in to, at
the opportune time, and corraborates Harry's alibi. Lupin takes the map, and
takes Harry and Ron out of Snapes office, but absconds Harry for his
irresponsibilty.

At the gate to the dorms, Hermione reveals that Hagrid lost his case with
Buckbeak and the beast is to be executed.
