Hermione has to spend several weeks in the hospital. Harry and ron visit her.
She has a note from Gilderoy Lockhart.

They hear a squeal from Filch, who is upset about the water outside the out of
use restroom. They investigate, and Myrtle is upset because someone threw a
book at her. The book is an old diary from T.M.Riddle, who got an award for
special services fifty years ago (when the chamber was last opened). It's a
Muggle book from Vauxhall Road. It's blank.

Hermione is released, and tehy show her teh book. They put together the ages,
and Hermione trys to make the "Invisible ink" appear, to no avail. They
investigate his trophy also, to no avail.

Harry overhears Lockhart telling McGonagall about a Morale booster. On
valentines day, Lockhart sends out dwarves to give people valentines cards.
Lockhart had already received forty six.

One of the dwarves gives an embarrasing musical message to Harry. As he tries
to get the dwarf off him, he spills ink all over his books. Malfoy teases him
about this and steals the diary, and harry uses a spell to disarm him in the
corrider. Percy sees this and has to report it. The diary does not have ink on
it, strangly.

Later that night, Harry begins to write in the Diary, and eth diary writes
back. The memories were stored in ink. Harry asks about the Chamber, and Riddle
tells him that it was opened before, but he was given a trophy to stay quiet
about it. He decides to show Harry what happened.

After a typical magical transportation, he finds himself in teh headmasters
office, when Headmaster (fifty years ago) Dippet and Riddle. Dippet denies
Riddles request to stay over the summer. Dippet wanders the halls, and
Dumbledore fifty years younger finds him and tells him to go to the dorms.
Riddle goes not to the dorms though, but to Snape's classroom. He stays there
for an hour.

After a time, someone goes by the passage. Riddle follows. It's a large boy
named Rubeus, who Riddle knows let out the monster. As Riddle draws his wand, a
monster comes out of teh hall behind Rubeus, and Riddle is about to cast a
spell on it when Rubeus stops him. The monster goes past, and this is where the
memory ends.

Harry returns. Ron comes in to see Harry sweating and shaking. It was Rubeus
Hagrid who opened the chamber fifty years ago.

