Harry tries to tell his friends something before Fred and George inturrupt.

The Ministry Cars show up. They get to the platform. They go through in pairs.
Ginny and Harry make eye contact and laugh as Percy notices Penelope.

Mr Weasley takes Harry aside. Harry reveals that he eavesdropped on the Weasley
parents and knows about black. Mr. Weasley urges Harry not to go looking for
Black.

Harry asks Ron and Hermione to speak in private. They go to the back of the
trian, where they find a cabin that is empty save for a sleeping wizard named
R.J.Lupin, who they spectulate to be the new Defense against the Dark Arts
teacher, sits alone.

Harry tells them about Black. His Sneakoscope goes crazy. They talk about
Hogsmeade, and Harry reveals to them that he never got permission to go.

When the food comes around, they try to wake Lupin, but he stays asleep.

Malfoy comes to taunt them. He is warded off by the sleeping professor. It's
begins to really rain outside.

The train stops, and shit goes dark. Neville stumbles in and asks what's going
on. They don't know. Lupin awakes. Lupin lights some flames. There is a cloaked
figure outside the cabin, that begins to suck the cold out of Harry. He hears
screams, but can't do anything.

He is slapped back to his senses. The lights are back on and the train is
moving again. Lupin hands him some chocolate to eat, and says that the thing he
saw was a dementor of Azkaban. Lupin goes to talk to the driver. They reveal
what happened. They saw the dementor, and Lupin summoned some silver spell and
told it that they weren't hiding Sirius Black there.

Lupin comes back, and Harry eats his chocolate, and feels better. They make it
to Hogsmeade station.

They get into a stagecoach which takes them to the school, before Hagrid can
talk with them.

On the way to the school, they see two more dementors guarding the school.
Malfoy trys to taunt Harry again for fainting, but Lupin wards him off again.

McGonagall takes Harry and Hermione away from the Great Feast to discuss the
dementors. Pomfey the nurse comes in to help treat Harry. Harry insists he's
okay, and McGonagall asks to stay with Hermione about her schedule. After only
a couple minutes, Harry and Hermione go down to the great hall, where they
missed the sorting.

Dumbledore makes some announcements. First, he mentions the Dementors, who have
been placed guard. They cannot be fooled even by invisiblity cloaks. Second,
there are two new professors, Lupin, for Dark Arts, and Hagrid, for Care of
Magical Creatures.

The feast concludes, and they go to their dorms.
