Filch arrives and sees his cat dead. Dumbledore comes and pulls everyone to the
scene. Lockhart offers his office as a discussion, and Snape and McGonagall
follow.

Dumbledore and McGonagall examine the cat, Snape broods, Lockhart rabbles on
about other past accomplishments, Filch is sobbing. Dumbledore proclaims that
the cat is not dead. Filch accuses Harry of Petrifying the cat. He says it's
because Harry knows he's a squib (related to the Kwikspell letter).

Snape suggests to punish Harry, and Harry can't come up with a good reason why
he was wandering around. Dumbledore proclaims the "innocent until proven
gulity" and Snape and Filch are not happy. Dumbledore says the curse can be
reveresed.

At the dorms, Harry and Ron discuss events. Ron explains a Squib is a person
born a wizard without ever having developed magical powers.

Ginny and Hermione are both uneasy about the attack on Mrs. Norris. Justin
walks to Harry but quickly aboutfaces before Harry could say hello. Hermione is
in the library trying to get a copy of "Hogwarts, a history" to learn about the
Chamber of Secrets, but it's all checked out.

During the boring History of Magic class, Hermione asks if Prof Binns, a ghost,
could talk about the Chamber of Secrets. Binns refuses, saying its a myth.
Hermione retorts saying that Myth is born in Fact, and Binns consents due to
the overwhelming interest of teh students.

Back when Hogwarts was founded by the four founders (the house names),
Slytherin wanted to be more exclusive. Slytherin left, and it's told that he
built the Chamber of Secrets in the school, and that only his own true heir
would be able to open it, unleashing the horror within to purge the school of
the unworthy.

Hermione asks about the "horror" and he says that it's some sort of monster
that only the heir could control. Upon more inquires, Binn's finally gets
annoyed and resumes boring history.

They run across Colin Creevey, and there are rumors that Harry is teh Slytherin
Heir.

They run to the inscription and have a look around. They see spiders, leading
to Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. They try and ask Myrtle about what happened, but
she just mentions that she came in here when Peeves insulted her, and she
wanted to kill herself, but she couldn't because she is already dead.

Percy catches them leaving the girls room, and deducts five points from Ron.

Later, in the dorm, the suspect Malfoy might have the key to teh Chamber, and
in order to find out, Hermione suggests that they use some Polyjuice to turn
into some Slytherin students and ask him about it.

In order to get to the potions, they are going to need access to the restricted
section of the library, and they plan to use Lockhart to get that access.
