Christmas approaches, and Harry plans to spend it at Hogwarts. Malfoy teases
him and Ron for this, but Snape breaks it up. Hagrid is outside potions class
with a tree, and sees the whole thing. After Hagrid puts the tree in the great
hall, the trio proclaims that they are searching the librarys for Nicolas
Flamel. Madam Pince, the librarian, is up in their stuff, and when Hermione
goes off, Ron and Harry agree to keep looking.

Ron teaches Harry wizard chess in the time off.

They get presents. Harry gets a wood flute from Hagrid, and a fifty-pence from
his Aunt and Uncle. He also got a sweater from Mrs. Weasley and some chocolate
frogs from Hermione. Lastly, he gets an invisiblity cloak, that used to be
his fathers, from an unknown sender.

The Weasly twins storm in and they all joke about their sweaters.

THey have a feast in the Grand Hall while a bunch of people exchange presents
in merriment. They have a grand old time.

In the night, Harry puts on the invisibility cloak. He goes to the library to
try and research Flammel without inturruption, but he opens a book and it
screams.

Proffessors start looking for him, and as he tries to get away, he makes his
way to a room he is unfamiliar with that has a mirror in it with a strange
inscription. He looks in, expecting to see his invisible self, but instead sees
himself with a bunch of people behind him. Harry begins to realize that it's
his family, and trys to touch the mirror. Eventually, he pulls himself away
from the mirror, and goes back to bed.

Harry get's Ron, and discusses the mirror. They go together to the mirror, and
Ron sees that he is the captian of the Quiditch cup, and such, instead.
As they fight over who should look in the mirror, Mrs. Norris sulks by, and
they quickly get under the cloak again. They get out lest Mrs. Filch catch
them.

The next morning Ron urges Harry to not go back to the mirror.

Harry goes back anyway, and Dumbledore inturrupts him. Dumbledore talks about
the "Mirror of Erised" and tells him that it shows the deepest desires. He also
warns about using it, and that it will be moved soon. Harry asks Dumbledore
what he sees, and he says "Socks". Unsure if this is the truth, Harry leaves it
at that.
