Harry sees a large statue of Slytherin with Ginny at it's feet. Ginny is
asleep, and Harry is informed by Riddle, who is behind him, that she won't
wake. Riddle informs Harry that he is a memory from that diary 50 years ago.

Harry is rather dense. Riddle gets Harry's wand, and as Harry tries to walk out
with Ginny, he asks Riddle what's going on. Ginny had written in the diary for
such a long time, and Riddle was reading. Riddle reavels that it was Ginny who
opened the Chamber of Secrets. Ginny also told Riddle about Harry.

Riddle framed Hagrid. After Harry wrote in the diary, Ginny got it back, but
Riddle forced her to say her farewell and come down to the chamber.

Riddle then goes to ask about the scar. When Harry says Voldemort was past his
time, Riddle spells out his full name and rearranges them, revealing that his
name is an anagram of "I am Lord Voldemort".

When Riddle claims he is the greatest wizard, Harry retorts, saying that
Voldemort is. At that, he hears the phoenix Fawkes come in with music and the
Sorting Hat.

Riddle asks Harry how he survived Voldemorts attacks. Harry says it was because
of the love of his mother. Riddle notes the similarites between the two of
them.

Riddle, getting the answer that "it was pure chance", summons the basilisk from
the mouth of the statue of Slitherin.

Harry closes his eyes, and falls back. He hears Fawkes taking the eyes out of
the Basilisk. Riddle urges the Basalisk to smell out Harry. Harry puts the
sorting hat on his head, and out of it comes a sword.

The snake pounces at Harry three times, and the third time, he plunges the
sword through the roof of the basalisk mouth. The snake tooth got him in the
elbow though.

Fawkes cries on the wound. Riddle taunts Harry's death, but the tears cure it.
Riddle takes the wand, and as he is about to cast the death spell on Harry,
Fawkes grabs the diary. Harry takes the tooth of the basalisk, and shoves it
into the diary. Riddle screams and disappears. Ginny comes back, delerious and
dreadfully frightened, and scared.

Harry takes Ginny back to where Ron was, who was able to make a hole in the
rocks. All of them grab on to the phoenix legs, and they are brought back up
through the pipes to Myrtles bathroom.

They follow the phoenix to McGonagall's office.
