In Dumbledore's office, Harry tries on the sorting hat again, and the hat
insists that he would have done well in Slytherin. Meanwhile, a bird in a cage
behind him bursts into flames.

Dumbledore walks in and explains Phoenixes to Harry. This one is named Fawkes.

Hagrid bursts in before anything can be said and says that it couldn't have
been Harry.

Dumbledore doesn't think Harry did anything, but asks Harry if he wants to tell
him something. Harry declines, even though he thinks about the voices he's been
hearing.

The students get ready to leave. The Weasly twins make fun of Harry, which
gives him comic relief. The polyjuice potion is ready.

ALl of the Weasley's are staying. They exchange presents. Harry gets a
toothpick from the Dursley's.

The last piece of teh Polyjuice potion is a bit of hair. THe plan is to put
Crabbe and Goyle to sleep, lock them in a closet, and take some of their hair.
Hermione is going to be Millicent Bulstrode, the girl she dueled with.

They take the potions. Harry and Ron become Crabbe and Goyle, but Herimone
elects to stay in the stall. They only have sixty minutes, so they decide that
they shouldn't waste more time.

As they are trying to find the Slytherin common room, they run across Percy.
Malfoy comes and beckon them to follow. They get to the Slytherin common room,
and Malfoy leaves them to get something to show them. He gets a newspaper
clipping telling how his father outed Mr. Weasley for the car incident.

He goes on, talking about his disdain of Dumbledore and such. Turns out, Malfoy
doesn't know who the Slytherin Heir is either. The chamber was opened fifty
years ago, and the person who opened it is probably in Azkaban.

The last thing Malfoy reveals is that there is the Ministry of Magic raided his
fathers place, but they didn't look in the secret chamber under the drawing
room floor.

They get back to the bathroom, and it turns out Hermione turned into a cat.
Moaning Myrtle is just pleased about it. They convince Hermione to take her to
the hospital.
