Harry and Hermione escape Blacks chamber (which has to be a plot hole now that
I think about it). They hide as Snape and Fudge are talking about the kiss to
be performed on Black.

They wait for those two to pass. They run further down the hall, and hide from
Peeves. They get to the hallway, and hear Dumbledore proclaiming that he is
about to lock past Harry and Hermione in. Present Harry and Hermione then meet
Dumbledore, and tell them that they succeeded. Dumbledore then waits for their
pasts selves to go into the past, and locks present duo into the hospital wing.

Pomfrey comes back in, and afetr a bit, they hear roars of anger coming from
Black's chamber. Snape yells, knowing this has something to do with Potter.
Fudge and Snape are super upset and storm into the ward and question Potter.

Dumbledore calm Snape down, and makes him realize how absurd what he is saying
is. Fudge is upset at the publicity. Dumbledore also convinces him to remove
the dementors, since they tried to kiss Harry. That's too much, even for Fudge.

After everyone leaves, Ron wakes up. Hermione explains what happened to Ron.

The next day, at teh end of exams, Ron and Hermione forgoe a Hogsmeade visit to
stay with Harry on the grounds. They talk with Hagrid, who tells them all about
Buckbeak's escape. Hagrid tells them that Snape told everyone that Lupin is a
werewolf. Lupin is packing his things to leave. Harry insists on visiting
Lupin.

Harry catches Lupin as he is packing his things and about to leave. Lupin asks
Harry about his Patronus, and Harry says it was a stag, like his fathers. Lupin
returns the invisibilty cloak to Harry, as well as the map.

Dumbledore comes in, and informs Lupin that his carriage out of there is ready.
Lupin makes his exit.

Harry then reveals that he is dissapointed that Pettigrew got away, and because
of him as well. Dumbledore then says that he will be happy that he saved
Pettigrew some day. Trelawney's prediction that the servent of Voldemort would
return has come true. Dumbledore reveals that the debt of a wizard saving
another is a great thing.

Harry then says that he thought it was his father. Dumbledore makes a cheesy
line about the dead living inside of us.

Malfoy is upset about the escape of Buckbeak, and Percy mentions that he has a
lot of proposals about Magical Law Enforcment.

Snape is super upset at Harry, and everyone has a happy end of year.

On the train back, Hermione says that she gave back her time turner. Ron
proposes to Harry the he stay with them this summer. The quidditch world cup is
this year.

Outside the train, an owl from Sirius with a letter for Harry comes in. Black
is in hiding, and plans to let himself be spotted far from Hogwarts so that
security is lifted. He also was the one who gave Harry the Firebolt. He got the
money from his own vault at Gringotts. He also has a signed notice from Black
that he is allowed to visit Hogsmeade. Lastly, he gifts Ron the owl.

At King's Station, Harry frightens Mr. Dursley about his Godfather who is a
convicted murderer.
