They go back to the tent. Harry, dreaming of the Wronski Feint, is suddenly
awakened by Mrs. Weasley. There is a group of masked wizards outside
manipulating some figures and blasting tents and stuff. Harry realizes that the
figures being manipulated are Mr. Roberts and his family.

Harry and group run into the woods while Mr. Weasley and teh older Weasley boys
go to confront the wizards, along with more of the ministry.

As they go through the woods, Draco Malfoy taunts them. Says they are after
Mudbloods. They speculate that his father is one of the masked wizards.

They run across a girl who speaks french from Beauxbatons school of magic.

Harry lost his wand.

They run into Winky, and have a short discussion about house elf slavery.

They go further, and run into the Veelas.

They get to the heart of the woods, where they decide to lay low. Bagman comes
in a scuffle and inquires what all the fuss is about. He disapperates away.
They contemplate the situation.

A figure near the trio calls Morsmordre, and puts a bright green sign of a
Skull with a serpent in the sky.

Hermione informs Harry that it's Voldemorts sign. As they try and run, they get
surrounded by 20 wizards, who attempt to stupify them. Arthur yells them to
stop, and Crouch asks them which of them made the Dark Mark in the sky.
Hermione says it was a dark figure.

Mr. Diggory says they think the stunners have found who it was. They find an
unconcious Winky. They find out she had a wand. Winky is revealed to be Barty
Crouches house-elf. Bagman apperates in, and is confused.

They begin to question Winky, and Harry realizes that Winky has his wand. Winky
is getting implicated for the conjuring, but Hermione appeals that the voice
they heard was a much deeper voice than Winky's. They perform the Prior
Incanto on the wand, and see that it was from that wand that the skull was
conjured from.

Crouch gets upset that his house elf is being accused. Crouch then says that he
will properly punish the house elf. Hermione is not pleased with this, but Mr.
Weasley says this is no time to argue elf rights.

As they go back to the tent, people are congregated and frightened. They get
back to the tent, where the whole Weasley gang is regathered, and explain what
happened with the dark mark.

They then talk about the Death-Eaters, Voldemorts supporters. When the mark was
shown, all of the deatheaters dissaperated and they weren't able to catch any
of them. They postulate that the masked wizards were scared of the mark because
they are the ones who renounced their Lord, and Voldemort wouldn't be very
pleased with them if he came back. We don't know if the person who put up the
Dark Mark did so to support or scare the Deatheaters.

But one thing is sure, only Deatheaters know how to make the mark. Harry thinks
about his scar, and the dark mark, as he goes to sleep.
