McGonagall thinks that they tried to feed Malfoy a story to get him in trouble.
She has Neville, and he believes that the group betrayed him as well. She
deducts fifty points each for the disturbance. That is, Harry, Hermione, and
Neville.

Harry goes into depression as the consequences of teh ponit loss sinks in.
Harry resolves not to meddle anymore.

Harry overhears Quirrell pleading for mercy in a room, and sees him come out
adjusting his turban. Harry resolves not to mess any more in this. They are at
a loss of what to do about the Sorcerers Stone.

Filch takes them to the detention, to Hagrid. They are to spend the night in
teh forbbidden forest.

Hagrid is trying to find a unicorn that has been bleeding. They split up, Harry
Hermione and Hagrid split from Malfoy, Neville, and Fang.

Hagrid's group runs across Centaur Ronan in the forest. Ronan says "Mars is
bright tonight" but not much else to their inquiries. Another centaur, Bane,
comes in, and is just as unhelpful.

They see sparks from the other group. Turns out, Malfoy scared Neville in fun
and Neville freaked out. They switch up the groups, Harry and Malfoy and Fang
and the other three.

Harry and Malfoy see a dead unicorn. Some being comes and drinks the blood, and
Harry's scar becomes so painful that he loses consciousness for a time.

Another centaur Firenze, helps Harry, and he gets onto his back. The lot of
them goes on about the "telling of the stars" and Firenze scolds them for their
lack of vision.

As they go back, Firenze tells Harry about the blood of the unicorn. Drinking
it will keep you alive, but at the cost that you killed something most pure.
Firenze then alludes to the Sorcerers stone. It's possible that Voldemort
killed the unicorn, drank it's blood, and is now after the stone. When he asks
if it was Voldemort, the others catch up to him before he gets an answer.

Harry runs through the scenario in his head with the others. He thinks that his
death was in the stars, but Firenze saved him.
