Harry has to take part in re-enactments in Dark Arts. He hates it, but goes
along with it.

After a class one day, Hermione kisses up to Lockhart, and he signs the
permission slip to get the book. As an aside, Lockhart offers Harry the
opportunity to take advice as a seeker if he wishes to take it.

They go to Moaning Myrtles restroom to concoct the potion. They read the book
and determine it will take a month to gather the required ingredients.

That Saturday is the Gryffindor v Slytherin match, and it's on Harry to
outperform Malfoy as seeker. The Bludger seems uncharicteristically
magnetically drawn to Harry. It starts raining.

They take a time out, and they are not sure how the Bludger became rigged. It's
been in Madame Hooches office and it wasn't cursed when it went in. Harry says
to leave the bludger alone, while the twins focus on the other part of the
game.

Malfoy taunts Harry about the bludger, and is oblivious to the snitch next to
him. Harry sees it, but the bludger hits him and breaks his right arm. Still,
he is able to fly to the snitch and get it with his good hand before crashing
and burning on teh ground.

Lockhart offers to help with the arm and Colin is taking pictures. Despite his
protests, Lockhart attempts to mend the broken arm, but instead totally removes
the bones.

Madame Pomfey, in the Hospital wing, uses some Skele-Gro. Harry is in for a
long painful night. He chats with Ron and Hermione and some otehrs about
things.

In the night, Dobby comes back. He reveals that he was the one who stopped them
on the train platform. Dobby is also responsible for the Bludger in the game.
Dobby reveals more about the Chamber of Secrets, just that it exists and that
it has been opened.

Dumbledore and Mcoganagall come in with a statue and put it in a bed. It's
Colin Creevy. He was found petrified on teh stairs. They take the camera out of
his hands and it burns. Dumbledore proclaims that the Chamber of Secrets is
open, but he does not know who or how it was done.
