Dumbledore rounds up the students in the Great Hall, and summons sleeping bags
for them. They discuss how Black may have gotten in. They turn the lights out
and attempt to sleep.

Dumbledore give report to Percy, they haven't been able to find black but they
will be able to restore the Fat Lady. Snape provides whisperings that perhaps
someone on the inside let him in, and that he shouldn't have appointed...
(Lupin, I assume) when Dumbledore cuts him off, and dismisses the idea.
Dumbledore refuses to let the Dementors in the school while he is Headmaster.

The Fat Lady is temporarily replaced by Sir Cadagon. People start tailing Harry
to protect him. McGonagall suggests Harry not practice Quiditch, but
compromises by placing Madam Hooch to watch them.

Slytherin backs out of the quidditch match last minute and they are to play
Hufflepuff, led by seeker Cedric Diggory, who is quite the ladys man.

Harry is late to Dark Arts class, and finds Snape teaching instead of Lupin,
because Lupin is sick.  Snape is being super dickish, and starts teaching on
werewolves. Ron speaks out of turn, and Snape gives him detention.

That night, before the quidditch match, is very stormy. Harry can't sleep, and
goes outside. At breakfast, Wood is nervous. Wood seems to be losing his voice.
The game starts. Wood calls a time out, and during, Hermione shows up and casts
a water repelent spell on Harry's glasses.

Harry is looking for the Snitch when he sees a shaggy black dog in the stands.
It freaks him out. He sees the snitch, and chases Cedric for it, but about 100
dementors are below, and cursing harry with that inside cold feeling. He hears
the voices of his mother being killed, and feels helpless to do anything about
it.

In the hospital wing, Harry is informed that he fell to the ground, and that
they are amazed he is alive. Dumbledore did a spell, and his broomstick flew
off into the Whomping Willow.
