Harry meets Quirrell in the final room. Immediately Quirell ties him up in
ropes. He reveals that he let the Troll out on Halloween, and that Snape was
giving a countercurse during the quidditch match.

The last trial is the Mirror of Eresid. Harry, trying to distract Quirell. The
discussion in the forest was Snape catching on to Quirell's trail. Quirell goes
on about Voldemort, and understanding his power. About Power and those too weak
to seek it. He failed stealing the Stone from Gringott's that day.

Harry thinks about a plan. The thing he wants most right now is to find the
stone before Quirell, so if he could look in the mirror, he could see where the
stone is hidden.

As Quirell tries to figure out the mirror, a voice from Quirell says "Use the
boy." He brings Harry to the mirror, who looks in. He sees himself in the
mirror, and feels the stone go into his pocket.

He lies about what he sees, he says he is shaking hands with Dumbledore and has
won the house cup.

The voice spoke again, and says that he wants to speak face to face.

Voldemort reveals some things about himself. He can only be incarnated through
anothers body, and Quirell has been drinknig Unicorn blood for him. Voldemort
taunts Harry telling him about his parents.

Voldemort then instructs Quirell to kill Harry. When he attempts to, he grabs
Harry by the wrist, but his hands start to burn. Harry understands what's
happening, and grabs Quirell by the face. Voldemort urges Quirell to sieze
Harry all the while, until eventually Harry loses himself in darkness.

Harry wakes with Dumbledore in the hospital wing. The whole school knows about
what happened, and has given harry gifts.

Dumbledore was the one to pull Harry off of Quirell. Dumbledore feared that
Harry had died. The stone has been destroyed, and Flamel and his wife will
arrange their affairs and finally die.

Harry and Dumbledore have a question and answer period. First, Harry wants to
know why Voldemort wanted to kill him, and Dumbledore answers that he can't
tell Harry at this time. Quirell couldn't touch Harry because of the love of
his Mother. Dumbledore sent Harry the invisibility cloak. James and Snape were
like Harry and Malfoy, and James saved Snapes life, which made Snape hate him
even more. Harry got the stone out of the mirror because he wanted to find the
stone but not use it.

Ron and Hermione come in. They exchange their hugs, and Harry tells them what
happened. Their end of the story, Hermione fetched Ron, and when they got to
the Owlery, Dumbledore knew already that Harry had gone down. Slitherin won the
house cup.

Hagrid comes in next, and is super remorseful about the whole thing. Hargrid
gets Harry an album of his parents.

At teh feast, Dumbledore begins his speech. He awards fifty points to Ron,
fifty to Hermione, sixty to Harry, tying them with Slytherin. Then, lastly,
ten to Neville, for standing up to his friends. The hall bursts into applause.

Then they all get ready to leave. When they get back to King's station, Ginny
is pointing excited to see Harry, and Harry thanks Mrs. Weasley for the
sweater. The Dursley's take Harry away, and he remarks that he is planning on
using magic on Dudley during the vacation.
