Malfoy is playing with the slytherin's taunting Harry's episode with the
dementor.

George and Fred comment on the Dementors. They hand out the third years
schedules. Ron notices that Hermione has overlapping classes, and she shrugs
him off.

The trio gets a bit lost on their way to Divination's in the North Tower. They
meet a knight named Cadogan in one of the paintings, and they follow him. They
end up at a room that leads to a trapdoor into an attic like place, where Prof
Trelawney is teaching Divination.

She is an eccentric woman, who talks about the art of Divination. She makes
some predictions, notably that one of them will leave them forever.

Harry and Ron take turns swilling some tea as the prof instructs, and they
attempt to read eachothers dregs. After they come up with some amusing symbols,
the professor has a whirl at interpreting Harry's cup.

She mentions that he has "the Grim", an omen of death. It relates to the dog he
saw. People begin eyeing Harry cautiously, who is slightly annoyed.

In Transfiguration with McGonagall, McGonagall absconds Divination as the
softest of the magics, and says that she always predicts the death of a
student, and they never die, so Harry shouldn't worry.

As they discuss it, Harry reveals that he did see a Grim in the street. Ron is
worried, but Hermione is skeptical of the whole divination thing entirely.

In the first class of Magical Creatures with Hagrid, Malfoy is there, and is
making fun of the textbooks. Hagrid shows how you open them, but stroking the
spine.

Hagrid then shows them Hypogriffs. They are proud. He asks for a volunteer to
try approaching one of them, named Buckbeak and Harry does.

He succussfully meets the Hypogryff, and is able to actually fly one around.
This amazes the class. Malfoy then tries, but disrespects the Hypogriff, and it
claws him.

The trio later sees Hagrid, who is sad because he believes he will be fired.
Malfoy is exaggerating his wounds. The trio comforts Hagrid, and he quickly
realizes that Harry is out after dark, and throws them out of his hut.
