# Platform nine and three quarters
Harry awaits his visit to Hogwarts, and the day before asks Mr. Dursley for a
ride, which is granted. When asked, he says the train is on platform nine and
three quarters.

The Dursley's drop him off between platform 9 and 10 and leave. Harry is
dumbfounded, until he meets the Weasley's. There are four red headed boys,
Percy, twins Fred and George, and Ron, Harry's age. There is also a girl named
Ginny, who wants to go but isn't old enough.

He runs through to find the train to Hogwarts. He meets a boy name Neville with
a toad, and the twins ask him if he is "the Harry Potter". Percy is a Prefect,
and rather proud of it. The twins tell their mother about Harry, and Ginny
overhears and wants to see him.

# The train ride
They load the train and go off. Harry and Ron get to talking. Ron is the
youngest of six boys, Ginny being his younger sister, and Bill and Charlie
being graduated. Ron reveals his rat, Scabbers.

Harry buys some of the every flavor beans, and eats them with Ron. Ron tells
him about some chocolate frogs with cards, he is collecting. Harry gets a card
with Dumbledore on it. It talks about Dumbledore's defeat of Grindelwald in
1945 with his partner Nicolas Flamel.

Neville inturrupts and reveals that he lost his toad. Hermione comes by,
watches Ron's failed attempt at magic, introduces herself, and continues
looking for the toad.

Ron talks about how, in the Daily Prophet, Gringots was attempted to be robbed.

Draco Malfoy walks in, the pale boy from Diagon Alley, with two thugs, Crabbe
and Goyle, and tease Harry. Harry cooly refuses to shake hands with him, and
Scabbers bites one of the boys and scares them off.

Hermione rejoins and tells them to get their robes on.

# Hagrid leads the first years through the path the Hogwarts
They get to Hogwarts, and Hagrid gathers all the first years. They go through a
narrow forest to a lake, where they see the castle. They get four to a boat, so
Harry and Ron get in with Hermione and Neville. On reaching the other shore,
Hagrid finds Trevor, Neville's toad.




