Harry starts becoming conscious about Snape, telling how Black must have
summoned a confusious charm on the trio, how they thought Black was innocent.
Snape then says that when he came to, he saw Black, Harry, and hermione, all
unconscious by the lake.

Harry wakes up to see that it's Snape telling Fudge what happened. They come
to, and persist about Black's innocence, but the whole thing seems
preposterous.

Dumbledore, who had been talking with Black, insists on talking to Harry and
Hermione alone. After resistance from everyone around, Dumbledore insists that
this cannot wait, and eventually convinces everyone else to leave the room.

When everyone leaves, Dumbledore calms them down and brings them to reality. He
believes them, but there is no time. There were eyewitnesses to Pettigrew's
death, Lupin is a werewolf in the forest, and no one will believe them as 13
year old wizards. Dumbledore believes them, but without Pettigrew, there is no
way that they will have any chance.

Dumbledore then gives them Blacks location, and says that they can save more
than one life tonight. It's five minutes to midnight, and he's going to lock
them in. He wishes good luck to Hermione.

Hermione takes out her hourglass, and turns it three times with Harry wearing
it as well.

Hermione explains, as they come to the entrance hall, that they've gone back in
time. Hermione explains how teh hourglass works to Harry in a broom closet.

Harry Dumbledore's plan together. They are to save Buckbeak, and then fly to
the window and rescue Black.

They follow themselves to Hagrid. They listen to the whole scene, and wait for
the ministry people to arrive, see Buckbeak, and come into Hagrid's.

Harry gets the idea to go in and seize Pettigrew, but Hermione urges him to
stick to the plan. They are playing with the most serious of wizard rules, and
the consequences are huge.

Mcnair the executioner comes in, and reads Hagrid the notice of execution.
During this time, Harry performs the respect ritual with Buckbeak, and frees
him from the rope, and brings him along. As Harry is about to be caught,
Dumbledore stops McNair, and requires more signitures for the execution.

When the commitee comes to find the beast missing, McNair knows he saw it
there, and Dumbledore is quite amused to find it missing. McNair swings his
axe at the fence in frustration, which is what past trio heard when they
thought Buckbeak was executed.

They begin to search for Buckbeak, and Dumbledore insists that they search the
skies. Black won't be in the tower for a couple more hours, so they have a
while to wait.

They know they have to watch the Willow, to get a timeline of events. They see
Ron get attacked by dog Black, and themselves get walloped by the Willow.

They watch Dumbledore and McNair go back into the castle. Then they watch Lupin
come into the Willow.

Harry gets the idea to grab the cloak so that Snape can't use it, but Hermione
again urges him not to be seen. They watch Hagrid singing happily into his
cabin, and Snape grab the cloak and go into the passage under the willow.

They then try and work out the riddle of why the Dementors flew away towards
the end. Harry thinks it was his father that warded them with a patronus. He
thinks it might not be so impossible taht his father, being an animorph as
well, could have come back tonight to save Harry.

They wait for an hour. They come back. Harry wants to try and find Pettigrew
after he turns into a rat, but Hermione again talks sense into him.

They get out of the forest, because Lupin is about to run into it. They retreat
into Hagrids now empty hut. Harry goes outside to make sure he still has the
timeline of what is going on. He sees the Demontors surround his past self, and
looks around for the figure that is going to summon the Patronus. As he is
looking for his dad to appear, he suddenly realizes that it wasn't his dad, but
himself, that summoned the patronus.

He summons the patronus, and wards the dementors away. It's a galloping silver
horse. He realizes, Prongs, the nickname for his father, is like the stag that
he summoned.

Harry explains to Hermione, he could summon the patronus, because he knew that
he already summoned it.

They then see Snape come get the unconcious bunch and lead them to the castle
on strethers. They eventually see McNair come out of the castle to get teh
dementors. That's their que. They get on Buckbeak, and go up to the tower that
Dumbledore instructed them to.

They get into Black's chamber. Black is understandably stunned, but is able to
escape with Buckbeak.
