The next morning, Harry goes back to the Moaning Myrtle toilet, and finds Ron
and Hermione working on teh potion. He tells them about Colin and Dobby. They
get more suspicios of Malfoy.

Rumor about Colin spreads.

McGonagall takes names for who is staying for Christmas, and the trio stays.
They also learn that Malfoy is staying.

They are close to finishing their potion, but they need a few more things, and
Snape is the only one who has them. Hermione comes up with the plan for her to
steal them and for Harry and Ron to distract Snape while she does.

On the signal, Harry takes a firecracker and sets Goyle's cauldren on fire.
That gives hermione enough time to sneak in and out of Snape's office with the
ingredients. They go back to the restroom. The potion will be ready in two
weeks.

Next week, Seamus and Dean Thomas notice a dueling club forming, and the trio
is all for it. Turns out, Lockhart is teaching the class with Snape. They give
a demo which Snape wins easily. Snape pairs them up, with Neville and Justin,
Ron and Finnigan, Harry and Malfoy.

On the mark, Malfoy preempts the clock, and they charm eachother with
non-disarm spells.

There is a rematch between Harry and Malfoy. Snape teaches Malfoy something
before the duel. Malfoy creates a snake during the duel. Lockhart throws the
snake to the wall, but it slithers ready to attack Justin. Harry commands it to
stop, and surprisingly, it does. Justin is scared and runs away.

At the Gryffindor hall, they say Harry is a "Parselmouth" he can talk to
snakes. The words that he used were like Parseltounge. The only other wizard
able to do that was Slytherin.

Harry thinks about his powers. He wants to go find Justin to explain teh
situation. As he goes to the Hufflepuff house, he overhears Ernie and some
Hufflepuffs talking about him, rumoring that he is a Dark Wizard.

Harry confronts them, and they recoil.

On the way out, Harry encounters Hagrid. Hagrid has a dead chicken, second
killed this term, and wants to put a barrier around the coop.

On the way out, Harry sees Justin, rigid, on the floor, with Nearly Headless
Nick floating above him. Peeves sees them, and sounds the metaphorical alarm.
Of course, this doesn't look good for Harry. After attending to the mess,
McGonagall takes Harry up to Dumbledore.
