Harry adjusts to his life now at the Weasley's. One day at breakfast, Ginny
drops her porridge. They get letters from Hogwarts detailing their next years
required text. It's a lot of books from Gilderoy Lockheart, the wizard that
Mrs. Weasley was oodling over earlier.

They get a letter from Hermione, telling how she has been, and that they should
meet at Diagon Alley.

They practice Quidditch in a field in the back, and they talk about how
expensive this year is going to be for them.

They all shoot through the fireplace to Diagon Alley. When Harry goes, he
misfires a bit, and lands in a room with a glass case. Malfoy and his father
talk about Harry. Malfoy is salty because he didn't get on the house Quidditch
team, and expresses his less than popular opinion of Harry.

They then turn to a Mr. Borgin. Mr Malfoy is selling some of his enchanted
artifacts due to the new laws that Arthur Weasley has enacted regarding
artifacts.

Malfoy asks for a Hand of Glory, which gives light to the user only. Mr. Malfoy
absconds his son for wanting a tool  for Theives, but that might be all he is
good for.

After haggling, the father and son leave.

Harry goes outside to see that he is in Knockturn Alley. He runs across a witch
selling fingernails on a platter, before he runs into Hagrid, who is looking
for slug repellent.

They meet up with Hermione and the Weasley's who are releived that he was safe.

They get introduced to Hermione's parents, and they go down to Gringots to get
their money out.

They all go their seperate ways, and agree to meet back in an hour.

The trio go shopping for their books, and it turns out that Gilderoy Lockheart
is hosting a book signing. Lockheart grabs Harry, and announces that he is the
new Defense of the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts. The press is all over it.

Malfoy shows up to taunt Harry, and Ginny stands up for him. Mr.Malfoy taunts
Mr. Weasley, and they get into a scuffle. Hagrid breaks them up, and they go
seperate ways

Gilderoy Lockheart is excited about the whole thing, and wants it to be
included in the report for more publicity. They use the floo powder to go back
to the Weasleys.
