McGonagall tells the students that there will be still exams.

Later, McGonagall tells them that the Mandrakes are ready, and they can finally
revive the students.

Ginny wants to tell Ron and harry a secret, but Percy inturupts and scares her
off before she can. Percy says that she caught him "Doing something". When they
ask what, Percy shrugs it off.

As Lockhart is escorting them to class, they kiss up to him, and they are
almost able to get to Myrtle before McGonagall catches them. They make up a
story about going to see Hermione, and McGonagall comes to tears. She lets them
off.

They go to the hospital wing, and see Hermione. There is a piece of paper in
her stone fist. It talks about the Basalisk, born from a chicken egg underneath
a toad. It kills any that look directly at it.

Harry is excited because that explains the voices he's been hearing. It also
puts together all of the other riddles. Mrs. Norris saw it in the reflection of
the water, Colin saw it through the camera, Justin saw it through Nick, and
Hermione and the Ravenclaw prefect knew to be careful so they looked around the
corners with a mirror. It also explains Hagrids mysterious Roosters dying.

They then think about how the snake could be incogneto for so long. They
conclude it's been in the pipes. They think that maybe Moaning Myrtle's
bathroom is the entrance to the chamber.

Just as they are going to tell professors about it, another announcement comes
on that students should return to their dorms. Harry and Ron hide and
eavesdrop.

Overhearing the conversation, another message has been sent, "Her skeleton will
lie in the Chamber forever." The student is Ginny Weasley. Lockhart bursts in
and askes what he missed. They put him on the task of getting the monstrer. He
trembles at the thought.

Harry and Ron are at a loss. They decide to go to Lockhart and tell them what
they know.

Lockhart is running away. He admits that he didn't do anything in his books,
that he got the info from other wizards and put a memory charm on them to make
them forget. He is about to memory charm Harry and Ron when Harry disarms him.
They take him to the bathroom.

They ask Moaning Myrtle how she died. She talks about how she was crying
because Olive Hornby made fun of her glasses, and then she heard a boy come
in, speaking in a strange language. Then she saw some eyes and died. The eyes
came from a tap.

Ron and Harry examine the tap, that's never worked, and it has a snake engraved
on it. Harry looks at the snake, imagines it's alive, says "open up" and the
sink opens. THey force Lockhart down first, and then Harry and Ron follow. They
all slide down so far, until the pipe levels out, and they come out the other
end.

They investigate the dark, and see the skin of a snake on the ground. Lockhart
wrestles Ron's wand, says he is going to take the skin of the snake up and
claim that he killed the snake. As he does so, the wand explodes, and rocks
fall on him. Ron is trapped under the rocks, but let's Harry go on.

Harry goes down a long hallway, and finds a door with two snakes entertwined
with emeralds in their eyes. Harry says open in Parseltongue, and gets through.
