# Grant's Response
Thanks for sharing your thoughts. It could be cool to become pen pals in
addition to normal pals, haha. I think making a regular practice of
communicating about this kind of stuff as clearly and concisely as possible
would be fruitful for both of us.

To satiate your curiosity, here's what I think about your thoughts. :)

It looks like you are in fact getting Charles' points generally, though perhaps
misunderstanding in a few details.

## 1. "Does it work?" vs "Is is true?"
It seems like we agree largely on this. But there is one aspect of your
thoughts I want to address. I agree with you that the utility of a worldview
should be one of the inputs into judging it, though as you said not the only
one. But If we're not careful about how we think and talk about that, it can
muddy the distinction between truth and utility.

During my first 2 years of college, I had what in retrospect I realize was an
astonishingly naive aspiration: I was going to stop down for a short time to
rationally build my worldview from the ground up and then start living my life
accordingly. When I quickly realized it was going to be impossible to build my
worldview like that in a reasonable time frame, or ever (surprise!), I decided
to bifurcate two questions: (1) What is true? and (2) What am I going to do
provisionally until I get further clarity about what is true?

I think that was a good move because it makes a conscious and clear distinction
between the pragmatic question and the truth question.

Let me summarize our conversation thus far with a stupid example to make my
point clear:

Grant: Is Mars bigger than Earth? (Imagine we live so many hundreds of years
ago and the answer is unknown)

Brett: The answer is presently unknowable so you can take either perspective.
Live as if Mars is bigger than Earth when it suits your objectives, and live as
if Mars is not bigger than Earth when it suits your objectives.

Grant: Sure, but let's be clear that it's either bigger or it's not. The two
claims are incongruent and they're not both actually true.  Yes, we can employ
either view to take advantage of their utility and to learn more about them,
but let's make sure we're clear that that is not the same thing as determining
which is true, if either. (I think the "if either" is an important nod to your
point that we need not limit ourselves to only two camps.  Maybe the truth is
something we wouldn't anticipate like Mars and Earth are exactly the same
size.)

If the only numbers you've ever multiplied are 2 and 2, then you'll likely
conclude that multiplication is just another word for addition. But once you
need to multiply anything else, that conclusion will lead you astray.

Here's part of why I care about this: When the truth/utility distinction is
muddied, it enables people to be super wishy-washy about the fundamental claims
of Christianity (that God [as characterized in the Bible] exists, that the
Incarnation took place, that there will be judgment and resurrection, etc.).
When I say I believe these things are objectively true, vitally relevant, and
merit a response from every person, the "enlightened psychologist" comes along
and praises the utility I find in using these myths to construct my view of
life. It's affirming at one level but condescending at another. I want to say,
"No. I'm not making a psychological claim. I'm making a historical claim here
and a metaphysical claim there. I'm not just saying I find these ideas helpful
psychologically. I'm saying I believe they are objectively true. Don't baby me.
If you think I'm wrong, show me the respect of disagreeing with me
out-rightly." Historically the Church through the ages has not been sneakily
offering people psychological placation under the guise of objective claims.
It's been making objective claims. I don't mean to over-rotate. The
psychological layer of the Bible and of Christianity is there and it's
legitimate to discuss it.

## 2. Rationalism
You disagreed with Hegel's characterization of Rationalism.  That's a bit like
disagreeing with the Pope's characterization of Christianity. Sure Hegelianism
is not the only form of Rationalism (as Catholicism isn't the only form of
Christianity), but it's one of the main branches, and I would say it's a very
influential and prominent branch today (though I am not very well-versed in
Hegel's work so I'm not certain about that). If you disagree with Hegel's
definition of Hegelianism, then it's not the definition you disagree with, it's
Hegelianism. It seems you might be overly-optimistic about how open-minded and
pragmatic the rationalism of our age is. Not that our age is primarily
characterized by rationalism. But where we find rationalism, I think it tends
to err toward the dogmatism Charles described.

## 3. Charles
I said above that it seems you misunderstood Charles in the details.  Here's
what I had in mind when I said that:

You rightly made the point that we need not limit ourselves to the two
perspectives that are duking it out in that medieval debate. I think Charles
would agree. He doesn't believe either of the perspectives that were in that
fight. I think he would say he believes in a variant of Realism that is
distinct from what the medieval realists were arguing (descended from Plato)
and that is better characterized as Hebrew and Eastern. As for the details on
what he means by that, we'd have to ask him.  But yes, the answer doesn't have
to be one of the two parties in that fight, and we would do well to keep other
possibilities in mind.  You critiqued Charles for pointing out that
"Problematic doesn't mean something doesn't exist.  We just don't know how to
explain it to our satisfaction." I think you misunderstood his intention here.
He wasn't lifting that up as a positive feature of Realism. He was only
bringing it up to point out the dogmatism of Nominalists who jump from
"problematic" to "false" in their assessment of Realism. If asked why he
believes in some form of Realism, he wouldn't say, "because it can't be
disproven." He would have some other set of arguments for it.

# My response

## 1. "Does it work?" vs "Is it true?"
I like the concept of creating a fictional Grant, and a fictional Brett, and
having them take part in a dialog together. So if this mythological Brett were
to meet up with the mythological Grant, and they were to have a discussion
about this, it would look something like this.

---

Brett: The only thing we can ever say with absolute certainty is that we have
experiences. We can never know anything else as truly as we know our own
being.

Grant: Sure, that seems reasonable, just as Decarstes said "I think therefore I
am" so you may say this. But I don't think I fully understand your position.
Let me ask you a question to see if I can come to more fully understand. Do you
know the relative sizes of Mars and the Earth.

Brett: Mars and Earth? Not that one. But I could maybe tell you the relative
sizes of the earth and the moon. I know the gravity on the moon is one sixth
the strength as it is on earth. That has to tell you something about the
relative sizes of those two celestial bodies. And when it comes to Earth and
Mars, I know at the very least that Mars is further from the Sun, that it's
composed of mostly red sand, and that it's smaller than earth. I also know that
Elon Musk has plans to create colonies on mars. We live in an amazing world.

Grant: Indeed, we do. But here I suppose I don't understand your answer. In one
statement, you tell me that you never know anything with absolute certainty
except our own perception of the universe, and then in your next you tell me
that you know that Mars is a red planet fourth in line to the Sun. How can you
make both of these claims? Surely you are not claiming that you are only
partially certain of Mars' redness, nor are you questioning your stance on
whether or not it is the fourth planet from the sun?

Brett: Well, I see no reason to question what others have told me about the
position of mars relative to the sun and the earth, but I understand your
point. So to answer, I will say this. As far as I am aware, Mars is the fourth
planet from the sun, it's red, and it's smaller than earth. As far as I know,
that is the truth of the situation. Now, if Elon Musk were to knock on my door,
take me in a spaceship, fly me to mars, and after the three year journey, we
get in our space suits and we walk on the surface of mars, and it turns out the
sand is not red so much as it is white, and a light tinge of green, now, if
such a thing were to happen (and I can't overstate how unlikely such a thing
happening would be) then at that point I would have to change my understanding
of what Mars is, because I have been handed evidence to the contrary. But until
that happens, or a similar event like it which requires me to change my
understanding of the facts that I know about mars, I will go ahead and say with
confidence that Mars is a red, sandy planet fourth from the sun, smaller than
earth.

Grant: And would you say you know that to be the case?

Brett: As much as I know anything about this crazy world. To illustrate my
point, though, I would say I know how to apply a rear-naked choke much more
than I know anything about Mars, because that choke is pretty fundamental to
jui-jitsu, and I have practiced it rather extensively both in drilling and in
live scenarios. So knowledege, I would say, is best thought of as a spectrum,
with each entry in the spectrum having a certain kind of certainty or level of
understanding attached to it.

---

Also, we certainly agree on the dangers of muddying truth/utility distinctions,
but interestingly for opposite reasons. I feel that muddying truth and utility
of an idea allows people to come up with delusional ways of living their lives.
For instance, I can imagine someone praying to the stars, and seeking
astrological advice for guidance on personal matters. While such a view may
have utility, that utility in no way justifies it as an actual way of
interpreting the world. The extent that we can use astrology, at that kind of
understanding, is that it can be something of a psychological aid to those who
would use it as such. Beyond that, we must understand that the positions of the
stars do not effect the material world in the ways that an astrologer might
think it does.

My point is, I see Christianity in the same camp as Astrology. I have a
co-worker who is legitamately invested in to astrology, to the point where
she won't date anyone unless they have the appropiate astrological sign. I see
a similar pathology when it comes to something like praying to God.
When I see a group of people all bow their heads and recite a prayer to the
Lord, they would argue, if I were to ask them, that they are coming in to
contact with the divine creator of the universe, and partaking in a dialougue
with it. To my eyes, this looks like pure delusion. Of course, the best way for
me to understand this is to see what they are going through as something of a
psychological phenomenon, one that is so strong that it has the capability of
persuading the one experiencing the phenomenon to believe that what is
happening is actually real, in the most materialistic sense of the word. The
fact that a psychological phenomenon could be so strong to someone is
fascinating to me, and it's the only path I know that will lead me to have a
better view of what Christianity is. It is because I reject the historical or
metaphysical claims of Christianity that the psychological reading so interests
me. It makes sense of something that previously made zero sense to me.

## 2. Rationalism
You are right, I am actually quite improperly versed in Rationalism to make any
claims about it. And trust me, I am fully aware of the pervalence of "dogmatic
rationalism", a quick gander over at reddit.com/r/atheism is more than ample
evidence of such a culture emerging.

So you are correct in saying that I am disagreeing here with Hegalianism as a
whole. To be entirely honest, I know nothing of Hegal and his work, but from
what it sounds like his work is probably really pompous and quite a drag, if I
had to guess. But I can't know for certain.

## 3. Charles
So I totally agree with everything you wrote here. I would just also add that I
would be curious to know what sorts of elements of "realism" would be worth
believing in. To me, the concept of Plato's realism (which you said is what a
more modern conception of realism would have evolved from) is only useful as
psychological aid in recognizing patterns, and says little to nothing about the
actual mechanisms by which we see and recognize patterns. But at the same time,
I am uneducated on Realism or any of it's variants, so I would be interested to
discuss it with someone who has a better understanding of it.

## Final thoughts.
I think that about covers everything that I could say about Realism or
Nominalism. I think the thing about it all is, since we seem to very much agree
that both ways of thinking, in themselves, are rather incomplete, what we are
talking about when it comes to these things is a theoretical world where such a
mechanism for the existance of things is the actual way that things come in to
existance.

The point that I feel strongly about, for whatever reason, is that *every* view
such as this is also a theoretical world where the mechanism for the existance
of things is thought to be the "actual" way that the world works. It's in the
process of evalutaing all of these theoretical worlds and contrasting them with
both eachother and also with our actual experiences that we are able to come to
more fully understand the universe that actually exists.

Newton made up a world with marbles and forces, Maxwell made up a world with
charges and electro-magnetic fields, Einstein made up a world with warped
space-time, and Schrodinger made up a world with waves and probabilities.
Similarly, Dante made up a world with a Heaven and Hell, Lucas made up a world
with jedi knights and sith lords, and the people who editted and revised the
bible made up a world with a Holy Trinity and a resurrection.

What I'm getting at is, I think the best way to see all of these things is to
ask ourselves, if these theoretical worlds were to describe the actual
mechanism by which the world exists, in whatever way is appropiate, what sort
of gained information or insight would that give us in to understanding the
things that happen to us in our everyday lives?

I think life is simply us always attempting to parse out and understand the
patterns that we see around us, and evalutating how we should act within those
patterns. We even have dreams which reveal the patterns of life to us in
crystallized form, and we as dreamers take an active role in participating with
this active hallucination. The way we come to understand the universe is by
constantly revising the way we see it, either becoming more fine-grained in our
understanding of certain aspects of the world, or by updating information that
we thought we knew about the world with new, pertinant, information. This
constant process of revising and updating the way that we interpret what
happens to us, as well as contrasting all of the ways that we have of
interpreting the world to eachother and comparing conclusions, is I think the
process by which human beings come to be more in tune and more in touch with
the doings and mechanisms of the universe.
