# PART III - CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART - I
[Metadata]: # {03.01.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART
I
# I
The fête took place in spite of all the perplexities of the preceding
"Shpigulin" day. I believe that even if Lembke had died the previous night, the
fête would still have taken place next morning--so peculiar was the
significance Yulia Mihailovna attached to it. Alas! up to the last moment she
was blind and had no inkling of the state of public feeling. No one believed at
last that the festive day would pass without some tremendous scandal, some
"catastrophe" as some people expressed it, rubbing their hands in anticipation.
Many people, it is true, tried to assume a frowning and diplomatic countenance;
but, speaking generally, every Russian is inordinately delighted at any public
scandal and disorder. It is true that we did feel something much more serious
than the mere craving for a scandal: there was a general feeling of irritation,
a feeling of implacable resentment; every one seemed thoroughly disgusted with
everything. A kind of bewildered cynicism, a forced, as it were, strained
cynicism was predominant in every one. The only people who were free from
bewilderment were the ladies, and they were clear on only one point: their
remorseless detestation of Yulia Mihailovna. Ladies of all shades of opinion
were agreed in this. And she, poor dear, had no suspicion; up to the last hour
she was persuaded that she was "surrounded by followers," and that they were
still "fanatically devoted to her."

I have already hinted that some low fellows of different sorts had made their
appearance amongst us. In turbulent times of upheaval or transition low
characters always come to the front everywhere. I am not speaking now of the
so-called "advanced" people who are always in a hurry to be in advance of every
one else (their absorbing anxiety) and who always have some more or less
definite, though often very stupid, aim. No, I am speaking only of the
riff-raff. In every period of transition this riff-raff, which exists in every
society, rises to the surface, and is not only without any aim but has not even
a symptom of an idea, and merely does its utmost to give expression to
uneasiness and impatience. Moreover, this riff-raff almost always falls
unconsciously under the control of the little group of "advanced people" who do
act with a definite aim, and this little group can direct all this rabble as it
pleases, if only it does not itself consist of absolute idiots, which, however,
is sometimes the case. It is said among us now that it is all over, that Pyotr
Stepanovitch was directed by the _Internationale,_ and Yulia Mihailovna by
Pyotr Stepanovitch, while she controlled, under his rule, a rabble of all
sorts. The more sober minds amongst us wonder at themselves now, and can't
understand how they came to be so foolish at the time.

What constituted the turbulence of our time and what transition it was we were
passing through I don't know, nor I think does anyone, unless it were some of
those visitors of ours. Yet the most worthless fellows suddenly gained
predominant influence, began loudly criticising everything sacred, though till
then they had not dared to open their mouths, while the leading people, who had
till then so satisfactorily kept the upper hand, began listening to them and
holding their peace, some even simpered approval in a most shameless way.
People like Lyamshin and Telyatnikov, like Gogol's Tentyotnikov, drivelling
home-bred editions of Radishtchev, wretched little Jews with a mournful but
haughty smile, guffawing foreigners, poets of advanced tendencies from the
capital, poets who made up with peasant coats and tarred boots for the lack of
tendencies or talents, majors and colonels who ridiculed the senselessness of
the service, and who would have been ready for an extra rouble to unbuckle
their swords, and take jobs as railway clerks; generals who had abandoned their
duties to become lawyers; advanced mediators, advancing merchants, innumerable
divinity students, women who were the embodiment of the woman question--all
these suddenly gained complete sway among us and over whom? Over the club, the
venerable officials, over generals with wooden legs, over the very strict and
inaccessible ladies of our local society. Since even Varvara Petrovna was
almost at the beck and call of this rabble, right up to the time of the
catastrophe with her son, our other local Minervas may well be pardoned for
their temporary aberration. Now all this is attributed, as I have mentioned
already, to the _Internationale._ This idea has taken such root that it is
given as the explanation to visitors from other parts. Only lately councillor
Kubrikov, a man of sixty-two, with the Stanislav Order on his breast, came
forward uninvited and confessed in a voice full of feeling that he had beyond a
shadow of doubt been for fully three months under the influence of the
_Internationale._ When with every deference for his years and services he was
invited to be more definite, he stuck firmly to his original statement, though
he could produce no evidence except that "he had felt it in all his feelings,"
so that they cross-examined him no further.

I repeat again, there was still even among us a small group who held themselves
aloof from the beginning, and even locked themselves up. But what lock can
stand against a law of nature? Daughters will grow up even in the most careful
families, and it is essential for grown-up daughters to dance.

And so all these people, too, ended by subscribing to the governesses' fund.

The ball was assumed to be an entertainment so brilliant, so unprecedented;
marvels were told about it; there were rumours of princes from a distance with
lorgnettes; of ten stewards, all young dandies, with rosettes on their left
shoulder; of some Petersburg people who were setting the thing going; there was
a rumour that Karmazinov had consented to increase the subscriptions to the
fund by reading his _Merci_ in the costume of the governesses of the district;
that there would be a literary quadrille all in costume, and every costume
would symbolise some special line of thought; and finally that "honest Russian
thought" would dance in costume--which would certainly be a complete novelty in
itself. Who could resist subscribing? Every one subscribed.

