# PART III - CHAPTER V. A WANDERER - VI
[Metadata]: # {03.05.06}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05.06}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# VI
[TreeTag]: # {03.05.06.01}
The night was passing. Shatov was sent hither and thither, abused, called back.
Marie was reduced to the most abject terror for life. She screamed that she
wanted to live, that "she must, she must," and was afraid to die. "I don't want
to, I don't want to!" she repeated. If Arina Prohorovna had not been there,
things would have gone very badly. By degrees she gained complete control of
the patient--who began to obey every word, every order from her like a child.
Arina Prohorovna ruled by sternness not by kindness, but she was first-rate at
her work. It began to get light... Arina Prohorovna suddenly imagined that
Shatov had just run out on to the stairs to say his prayers and began laughing.
Marie laughed too, spitefully, malignantly, as though such laughter relieved
her. At last they drove Shatov away altogether. A damp, cold morning dawned. He
pressed his face to the wall in the corner just as he had done the evening
before when Erkel came. He was trembling like a leaf, afraid to think, but his
mind caught at every thought as it does in dreams.

He was continually being carried away by day-dreams, which snapped off short
like a rotten thread. From the room came no longer groans but awful animal
cries, unendurable, incredible. He tried to stop up his ears, but could not,
and he fell on his knees, repeating unconsciously, "Marie, Marie!" Then
suddenly he heard a cry, a new cry, which made Shatov start and jump up from
his knees, the cry of a baby, a weak discordant cry. He crossed himself and
rushed into the room. Arina Prohorovna held in her hands a little red wrinkled
creature, screaming, and moving its little arms and legs, fearfully helpless,
and looking as though it could be blown away by a puff of wind, but screaming
and seeming to assert its full right to live. Marie was lying as though
insensible, but a minute later she opened her eyes, and bent a strange, strange
look on Shatov: it was something quite new, that look. What it meant exactly he
was not able to understand yet, but he had never known such a look on her face
before.

"Is it a boy? Is it a boy?" she asked Arina Prohorovna in an exhausted voice.

"It is a boy," the latter shouted in reply, as she bound up the child.

When she had bound him up and was about to lay him across the bed between the
two pillows, she gave him to Shatov for a minute to hold. Marie signed to him
on the sly as though afraid of Arina Prohorovna. He understood at once and
brought the baby to show her.

"How... pretty he is," she whispered weakly with a smile.

"Foo, what does he look like," Arina Prohorovna laughed gaily in triumph,
glancing at Shatov's face. "What a funny face!"

"You may be merry, Arina Prohorovna.... It's a great joy," Shatov faltered with
an expression of idiotic bliss, radiant at the phrase Marie had uttered about
the child.

"Where does the great joy come in?" said Arina Prohorovna good-humouredly,
bustling about, clearing up, and working like a convict.

"The mysterious coming of a new creature, a great and inexplicable mystery; and
what a pity it is, Arina Prohorovna, that you don't understand it."

Shatov spoke in an incoherent, stupefied and ecstatic way. Something seemed to
be tottering in his head and welling up from his soul apart from his own will.

"There were two and now there's a third human being, a new spirit, finished and
complete, unlike the handiwork of man; a new thought and a new love... it's
positively frightening.... And there's nothing grander in the world."

"Ech, what nonsense he talks! It's simply a further development of the
organism, and there's nothing else in it, no mystery," said Arina Prohorovna
with genuine and good-humoured laughter. "If you talk like that, every fly is a
mystery. But I tell you what: superfluous people ought not to be born. We must
first remould everything so that they won't be superfluous and then bring them
into the world. As it is, we shall have to take him to the Foundling, the day
after to-morrow.... Though that's as it should be."

"I will never let him go to the Foundling," Shatov pronounced resolutely,
staring at the floor.

"You adopt him as your son?"

"He is my son."

"Of course he is a Shatov, legally he is a Shatov, and there's no need for you
to pose as a humanitarian. Men can't get on without fine words. There, there,
it's all right, but look here, my friends," she added, having finished clearing
up at last, "it's time for me to go. I'll come again this morning, and again in
the evening if necessary, but now, since everything has gone off so well, I
must run off to my other patients, they've been expecting me long ago. I
believe you got an old woman somewhere, Shatov; an old woman is all very well,
but don't you, her tender husband, desert her; sit beside her, you may be of
use; Marya Ignatyevna won't drive you away, I fancy.... There, there, I was
only laughing."

At the gate, to which Shatov accompanied her, she added to him alone.

"You've given me something to laugh at for the rest of my life; I shan't charge
you anything; I shall laugh at you in my sleep! I have never seen anything
funnier than you last night."

She went off very well satisfied. Shatov's appearance and conversation made it
as clear as daylight that this man "was going in for being a father and was a
ninny." She ran home on purpose to tell Virginsky about it, though it was
shorter and more direct to go to another patient.

"Marie, she told you not to go to sleep for a little time, though, I see, it's
very hard for you," Shatov began timidly. "I'll sit here by the window and take
care of you, shall I?"

And he sat down, by the window behind the sofa so that she could not see him.
But before a minute had passed she called him and fretfully asked him to
arrange the pillow. He began arranging it. She looked angrily at the wall.

"That's not right, that's not right.... What hands!"

Shatov did it again.

"Stoop down to me," she said wildly, trying hard not to look at him.

He started but stooped down.

"More... not so... nearer," and suddenly her left arm was impulsively thrown
round his neck and he felt her warm moist kiss on his forehead.

"Marie!"

Her lips were quivering, she was struggling with herself, but suddenly she
raised herself and said with flashing eyes:

"Nikolay Stavrogin is a scoundrel!" And she fell back helplessly with her face
in the pillow, sobbing hysterically, and tightly squeezing Shatov's hand in
hers.

From that moment she would not let him leave her; she insisted on his sitting
by her pillow. She could not talk much but she kept gazing at him and smiling
blissfully. She seemed suddenly to have become a silly girl. Everything seemed
transformed. Shatov cried like a boy, then talked of God knows what, wildly,
crazily, with inspiration, kissed her hands; she listened entranced, perhaps
not understanding him, but caressingly ruffling his hair with her weak hand,
smoothing it and admiring it. He talked about Kirillov, of how they would now
begin "a new life" for good, of the existence of God, of the goodness of all
men. ... She took out the child again to gaze at it rapturously.

"Marie," he cried, as he held the child in his arms, "all the old madness,
shame, and deadness is over, isn't it? Let us work hard and begin a new life,
the three of us, yes, yes!... Oh, by the way, what shall we call him, Marie?"

"What shall we call him?" she repeated with surprise, and there was a sudden
look of terrible grief in her face.

She clasped her hands, looked reproachfully at Shatov and hid her face in the
pillow.

"Marie, what is it?" he cried with painful alarm.

"How could you, how could you... Oh, you ungrateful man!"

"Marie, forgive me, Marie... I only asked you what his name should be. I don't
know...."

"Ivan, Ivan." She raised her flushed and tear-stained face. "How could you
suppose we should call him by another _horrible_ name?"

"Marie, calm yourself; oh, what a nervous state you are in!"

"That's rude again, putting it down to my nerves. I bet that if I'd said his
name was to be that other... horrible name, you'd have agreed at once and not
have noticed it even! Oh, men, the mean ungrateful creatures, they are all
alike!"

A minute later, of course, they were reconciled. Shatov persuaded her to have a
nap. She fell asleep but still kept his hand in hers; she waked up frequently,
looked at him, as though afraid he would go away, and dropped asleep again.

Kirillov sent an old woman "to congratulate them," as well as some hot tea,
some freshly cooked cutlets, and some broth and white bread for Marya
Ignatyevna. The patient sipped the broth greedily, the old woman undid the
baby's wrappings and swaddled it afresh, Marie made Shatov have a cutlet too.

Time was passing. Shatov, exhausted, fell asleep himself in his chair, with his
head on Marie's pillow. So they were found by Arina Prohorovna, who kept her
word. She waked them up gaily, asked Marie some necessary questions, examined
the baby, and again forbade Shatov to leave her. Then, jesting at the "happy
couple," with a shade of contempt and superciliousness she went away as well
satisfied as before.

It was quite dark when Shatov waked up. He made haste to light the candle and
ran for the old woman; but he had hardly begun to go down the stairs when he
was struck by the sound of the soft, deliberate steps of someone coming up
towards him. Erkel came in.

"Don't come in," whispered Shatov, and impulsively seizing him by the hand he
drew him back towards the gate. "Wait here, I'll come directly, I'd completely
forgotten you, completely! Oh, how you brought it back!"

He was in such haste that he did not even run in to Kirillov's, but only called
the old woman. Marie was in despair and indignation that "he could dream of
leaving her alone."

"But," he cried ecstatically, "this is the very last step! And then for a new
life and we'll never, never think of the old horrors again!"

He somehow appeased her and promised to be back at nine o'clock; he kissed her
warmly, kissed the baby and ran down quickly to Erkel.

They set off together to Stavrogin's park at Skvoreshniki, where, in a secluded
place at the very edge of the park where it adjoined the pine wood, he had,
eighteen months before, buried the printing press which had been entrusted to
him. It was a wild and deserted place, quite hidden and at some distance from
the Stavrogins' house. It was two or perhaps three miles from Filipov's house.

"Are we going to walk all the way? I'll take a cab."

"I particularly beg you not to," replied Erkel.

They insisted on that. A cabman would be a witness.

"Well... bother! I don't care, only to make an end of it."

They walked very fast.

"Erkel, you little boy," cried Shatov, "have you ever been happy?"

"You seem to be very happy just now," observed Erkel with curiosity.

