# PART III - CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART - III
[Metadata]: # {03.01.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01.03}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# III
[TreeTag]: # {03.01.03.01}
There was a feeling in the hall that something was wrong again. Let me state to
begin with that I have the deepest reverence for genius, but why do our
geniuses in the decline of their illustrious years behave sometimes exactly
like little boys? What though he was Karmazinov, and came forward with as much
dignity as five _Kammerherrs_ rolled into one? How could he expect to keep an
audience like ours listening for a whole hour to a single paper? I have
observed, in fact, that however big a genius a man may be, he can't monopolise
the attention of an audience at a frivolous literary matinée for more than
twenty minutes with impunity. The entrance of the great writer was received,
indeed, with the utmost respect: even the severest elderly men showed signs of
approval and interest, and the ladies even displayed some enthusiasm. The
applause was brief, however, and somehow uncertain and not unanimous. Yet there
was no unseemly behaviour in the back rows, till Karmazinov began to speak, not
that anything very bad followed then, but only a sort of misunderstanding. I
have mentioned already that he had rather a shrill voice, almost feminine in
fact, and at the same time a genuinely aristocratic lisp. He had hardly
articulated a few words when someone had the effrontery to laugh
aloud--probably some ignorant simpleton who knew nothing of the world, and was
congenitally disposed to laughter. But there was nothing like a hostile
demonstration; on the contrary people said "sh-h!" and the offender was
crushed. But Mr. Karmazinov, with an affected air and intonation, announced
that "at first he had declined absolutely to read." (Much need there was to
mention it!) "There are some lines which come so deeply from the heart that it
is impossible to utter them aloud, so that these holy things cannot be laid
before the public"--(Why lay them then?)--"but as he had been begged to do so,
he was doing so, and as he was, moreover, laying down his pen forever, and had
sworn to write no more, he had written this last farewell; and as he had sworn
never, on any inducement, to read anything in public," and so on, and so on,
all in that style.

But all that would not have mattered; every one knows what authors' prefaces
are like, though, I may observe, that considering the lack of culture of our
audience and the irritability of the back rows, all this may have had an
influence. Surely it would have been better to have read a little story, a
short tale such as he had written in the past--over-elaborate, that is, and
affected, but sometimes witty. It would have saved the situation. No, this was
quite another story! It was a regular oration! Good heavens, what wasn't there
in it! I am positive that it would have reduced to rigidity even a Petersburg
audience, let alone ours. Imagine an article that would have filled some thirty
pages of print of the most affected, aimless prattle; and to make matters
worse, the gentleman read it with a sort of melancholy condescension as though
it were a favour, so that it was almost insulting to the audience. The
subject.... Who could make it out? It was a sort of description of certain
impressions and reminiscences. But of what? And about what? Though the leading
intellects of the province did their utmost during the first half of the
reading, they could make nothing of it, and they listened to the second part
simply out of politeness. A great deal was said about love, indeed, of the love
of the genius for some person, but I must admit it made rather an awkward
impression. For the great writer to tell us about his first kiss seemed to my
mind a little incongruous with his short and fat little figure... Another thing
that was offensive; these kisses did not occur as they do with the rest of
mankind. There had to be a framework of gorse (it had to be gorse or some such
plant that one must look up in a flora) and there had to be a tint of purple in
the sky, such as no mortal had ever observed before, or if some people had seen
it, they had never noticed it, but he seemed to say, "I have seen it and am
describing it to you, fools, as if it were a most ordinary thing." The tree
under which the interesting couple sat had of course to be of an orange colour.
They were sitting somewhere in Germany. Suddenly they see Pompey or Cassius on
the eve of a battle, and both are penetrated by a thrill of ecstasy. Some
wood-nymph squeaked in the bushes. Gluck played the violin among the reeds. The
title of the piece he was playing was given in full, but no one knew it, so
that one would have had to look it up in a musical dictionary. Meanwhile a fog
came on, such a fog, such a fog, that it was more like a million pillows than a
fog. And suddenly everything disappears and the great genius is crossing the
frozen Volga in a thaw. Two and a half pages are filled with the crossing, and
yet he falls through the ice. The genius is drowning--you imagine he was
drowned? Not a bit of it; this was simply in order that when he was drowning
and at his last gasp, he might catch sight of a bit of ice, the size of a pea,
but pure and crystal "as a frozen tear," and in that tear was reflected
Germany, or more accurately the sky of Germany, and its iridescent sparkle
recalled to his mind the very tear which "dost thou remember, fell from thine
eyes when we were sitting under that emerald tree, and thou didst cry out
joyfully: 'There is no crime!' 'No,' I said through my tears, 'but if that is
so, there are no righteous either.' We sobbed and parted forever." She went off
somewhere to the sea coast, while he went to visit some caves, and then he
descends and descends and descends for three years under Suharev Tower in
Moscow, and suddenly in the very bowels of the earth, he finds in a cave a
lamp, and before the lamp a hermit. The hermit is praying. The genius leans
against a little barred window, and suddenly hears a sigh. Do you suppose it
was the hermit sighing? Much he cares about the hermit! Not a bit of it, this
sigh simply reminds him of her first sigh, thirty-seven years before, "in
Germany, when, dost thou remember, we sat under an agate tree and thou didst
say to me, 'Why love? See ochra is growing all around and I love thee; but the
ochra will cease to grow, and I shall cease to love.'" Then the fog comes on
again, Hoffman appears on the scene, the wood-nymph whistles a tune from
Chopin, and suddenly out of the fog appears Ancus Marcius over the roofs of
Rome, wearing a laurel wreath. "A chill of ecstasy ran down our backs and we
parted forever"--and so on and so on.

Perhaps I am not reporting it quite right and don't know how to report it, but
the drift of the babble was something of that sort. And after all, how
disgraceful this passion of our great intellects for jesting in a superior way
really is! The great European philosopher, the great man of science, the
inventor, the martyr--all these who labour and are heavy laden, are to the
great Russian genius no more than so many cooks in his kitchen. He is the
master and they come to him, cap in hand, awaiting orders. It is true he jeers
superciliously at Russia too, and there is nothing he likes better than
exhibiting the bankruptcy of Russia in every relation before the great minds of
Europe, but as regards himself, no, he is at a higher level than all the great
minds of Europe; they are only material for his jests. He takes another man's
idea, tacks on to it its antithesis, and the epigram is made. There is such a
thing as crime, there is no such thing as crime; there is no such thing as
justice, there are no just men; atheism, Darwinism, the Moscow bells.... But
alas, he no longer believes in the Moscow bells; Rome, laurels.... But he has
no belief in laurels even.... We have a conventional attack of Byronic spleen,
a grimace from Heine, something of Petchorin--and the machine goes on rolling,
whistling, at full speed. "But you may praise me, you may praise me, that I
like extremely; it's only in a manner of speaking that I lay down the pen; I
shall bore you three hundred times more, you'll grow weary of reading me...."

Of course it did not end without trouble; but the worst of it was that it was
his own doing. People had for some time begun shuffling their feet, blowing
their noses, coughing, and doing everything that people do when a lecturer,
whoever he may be, keeps an audience for longer than twenty minutes at a
literary matinée. But the genius noticed nothing of all this. He went on
lisping and mumbling, without giving a thought to the audience, so that every
one began to wonder. Suddenly in a back row a solitary but loud voice was
heard:

"Good Lord, what nonsense!"

The exclamation escaped involuntarily, and I am sure was not intended as a
demonstration. The man was simply worn out. But Mr. Karmazinov stopped, looked
sarcastically at the audience, and suddenly lisped with the deportment of an
aggrieved _kammerherr._

"I'm afraid I've been boring you dreadfully, gentlemen?"

That was his blunder, that he was the first to speak; for provoking an answer
in this way he gave an opening for the rabble to speak, too, and even
legitimately, so to say, while if he had restrained himself, people would have
gone on blowing their noses and it would have passed off somehow. Perhaps he
expected applause in response to his question, but there was no sound of
applause; on the contrary, every one seemed to subside and shrink back in
dismay.

"You never did see Ancus Marcius, that's all brag," cried a voice that sounded
full of irritation and even nervous exhaustion.

"Just so," another voice agreed at once. "There are no such things as ghosts
nowadays, nothing but natural science. Look it up in a scientific book."

"Gentlemen, there was nothing I expected less than such objections," said
Karmazinov, extremely surprised. The great genius had completely lost touch
with his Fatherland in Karlsruhe.

"Nowadays it's outrageous to say that the world stands on three fishes," a
young lady snapped out suddenly. "You can't have gone down to the hermit's
cave, Karmazinov. And who talks about hermits nowadays?"

"Gentlemen, what surprises me most of all is that you take it all so seriously.
However... however, you are perfectly right. No one has greater respect for
truth and realism than I have...."

Though he smiled ironically he was tremendously overcome. His face seemed to
express: "I am not the sort of man you think, I am on your side, only praise
me, praise me more, as much as possible, I like it extremely...."

"Gentlemen," he cried, completely mortified at last, "I see that my poor poem
is quite out of place here. And, indeed, I am out of place here myself, I
think."

"You threw at the crow and you hit the cow," some fool, probably drunk, shouted
at the top of his voice, and of course no notice ought to have been taken of
him. It is true there was a sound of disrespectful laughter.

"A cow, you say?" Karmazinov caught it up at once, his voice grew shriller and
shriller. "As for crows and cows, gentlemen, I will refrain. I've too much
respect for any audience to permit myself comparisons, however harmless; but I
did think..."

"You'd better be careful, sir," someone shouted from a back row.

"But I had supposed that laying aside my pen and saying farewell to my readers,
I should be heard..."

"No, no, we want to hear you, we want to," a few voices from the front row
plucked up spirit to exclaim at last.

"Read, read!" several enthusiastic ladies' voices chimed in, and at last there
was an outburst of applause, sparse and feeble, it is true.

"Believe me, Karmazinov, every one looks on it as an honour..." the marshal's
wife herself could not resist saying.

"Mr. Karmazinov!" cried a fresh young voice in the back of the hall suddenly.
It was the voice of a very young teacher from the district school who had only
lately come among us, an excellent young man, quiet and gentlemanly. He stood
up in his place. "Mr. Karmazinov, if I had the happiness to fall in love as you
have described to us, I really shouldn't refer to my love in an article
intended for public reading...." He flushed red all over.

"Ladies and gentlemen," cried Karmazinov, "I have finished. I will omit the end
and withdraw. Only allow me to read the six last lines:

"Yes, dear reader, farewell!" he began at once from the manuscript without
sitting down again in his chair. "Farewell, reader; I do not greatly insist on
our parting friends; what need to trouble you, indeed. You may abuse me, abuse
me as you will if it affords you any satisfaction. But best of all if we forget
one another forever. And if you all, readers, were suddenly so kind as to fall
on your knees and begin begging me with tears, 'Write, oh, write for us,
Karmazinov--for the sake of Russia, for the sake of posterity, to win laurels,'
even then I would answer you, thanking you, of course, with every courtesy,
'No, we've had enough of one another, dear fellow-countrymen, _merci!_ It's
time we took our separate ways!' _Merci, merci, merci!_"

Karmazinov bowed ceremoniously, and, as red as though he had been cooked,
retired behind the scenes.

"Nobody would go down on their knees; a wild idea!"

"What conceit!"

"That's only humour," someone more reasonable suggested.

"Spare me your humour."

"I call it impudence, gentlemen!"

"Well, he's finished now, anyway!"

"Ech, what a dull show!"

But all these ignorant exclamations in the back rows (though they were confined
to the back rows) were drowned in applause from the other half of the audience.
They called for Karmazinov. Several ladies with Yulia Mihailovna and the
marshal's wife crowded round the platform. In Yulia Mihailovna's hands was a
gorgeous laurel wreath resting on another wreath of living roses on a white
velvet cushion.

"Laurels!" Karmazinov pronounced with a subtle and rather sarcastic smile. "I
am touched, of course, and accept with real emotion this wreath prepared
beforehand, but still fresh and unwithered, but I assure you, mesdames, that I
have suddenly become so realistic that I feel laurels would in this age be far
more appropriate in the hands of a skilful cook than in mine...."

"Well, a cook is more useful," cried the divinity student, who had been at the
"meeting" at Virginsky's.

There was some disorder. In many rows people jumped up to get a better view of
the presentation of the laurel wreath.

"I'd give another three roubles for a cook this minute," another voice assented
loudly, too loudly; insistently, in fact.

"So would I."

"And I."

"Is it possible there's no buffet?..."

"Gentlemen, it's simply a swindle...."

It must be admitted, however, that all these unbridled gentlemen still stood in
awe of our higher officials and of the police superintendent, who was present
in the hall. Ten minutes later all had somehow got back into their places, but
there was not the same good order as before. And it was into this incipient
chaos that poor Stepan Trofimovitch was thrust.

