# PART I - CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING. - VI
[Metadata]: # {01.02.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02.06}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING.
VI
# VI
I will now enter upon the description of that almost forgotten incident with
which my story properly speaking begins.

At last at the very end of August the Drozdovs returned. Their arrival made a
considerable sensation in local society, and took place shortly before their
relation, our new governor's wife, made her long-expected appearance. But of
all these interesting events I will speak later. For the present I will confine
myself to saying that Praskovya Ivanovna brought Varvara Petrovna, who was
expecting her so impatiently, a most perplexing problem: Nikolay had parted
from them in July, and, meeting Count K. on the Rhine, had set off with him and
his family for Petersburg. (N.B.--The Count's three daughters were all of
marriageable age.)

"Lizaveta is so proud and obstinate that I could get nothing out of her,"
Praskovya Ivanovna said in conclusion. "But I saw for myself that something had
happened between her and Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. I don't know the reasons, but
I fancy, my dear Varvara Petrovna, that you will have to ask your Darya
Pavlovna for them. To my thinking Liza was offended. I'm glad. I can tell you
that I've brought you back your favourite at last and handed her over to you;
it's a weight off my mind."

These venomous words were uttered with remarkable irritability. It was evident
that the "flabby" woman had prepared them and gloated beforehand over the
effect they would produce. But Varvara Petrovna was not the woman to be
disconcerted by sentimental effects and enigmas. She sternly demanded the most
precise and satisfactory explanations. Praskovya Ivanovna immediately lowered
her tone and even ended by dissolving into tears and expressions of the warmest
friendship. This irritable but sentimental lady, like Stepan Trofimovitch, was
forever yearning for true friendship, and her chief complaint against her
daughter Lizaveta Nikolaevna was just that "her daughter was not a friend to
her."

But from all her explanations and outpourings nothing certain could be gathered
but that there actually had been some sort of quarrel between Liza and Nikolay,
but of the nature of the quarrel Praskovya Ivanovna was obviously unable to
form a definite idea. As for her imputations against Darya Pavlovna, she not
only withdrew them completely in the end, but even particularly begged Varvara
Petrovna to pay no attention to her words, because "they had been said in
irritation." In fact, it had all been left very far from clear--suspicious,
indeed. According to her account the quarrel had arisen from Liza's "obstinate
and ironical character." "Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch is proud, too, and though he
was very much in love, yet he could not endure sarcasm, and began to be
sarcastic himself. Soon afterwards we made the acquaintance of a young man, the
nephew, I believe, of your 'Professor' and, indeed, the surname's the same."

"The son, not the nephew," Varvara Petrovna corrected her.

Even in old days Praskovya Ivanovna had been always unable to recall Stepan
Trofimovitch's name, and had always called him the "Professor."

"Well, his son, then; so much the better. Of course, it's all the same to me.
An ordinary young man, very lively and free in his manners, but nothing special
in him. Well, then, Liza herself did wrong, she made friends with the young man
with the idea of making Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch jealous. I don't see much harm
in that; it's the way of girls, quite usual, even charming in them. Only
instead of being jealous Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch made friends with the young
man himself, just as though he saw nothing and didn't care. This made Liza
furious. The young man soon went away (he was in a great hurry to get
somewhere) and Liza took to picking quarrels with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch at
every opportunity. She noticed that he used sometimes to talk to Dasha; and,
well, she got in such a frantic state that even my life wasn't worth living, my
dear. The doctors have forbidden my being irritated, and I was so sick of their
lake they make such a fuss about, it simply gave me toothache, I had such
rheumatism. It's stated in print that the Lake of Geneva does give people the
toothache. It's a feature of the place. Then Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch suddenly
got a letter from the countess and he left us at once. He packed up in one day.
They parted in a friendly way, and Liza became very cheerful and frivolous, and
laughed a great deal seeing him off; only that was all put on. When he had gone
she became very thoughtful, and she gave up speaking of him altogether and
wouldn't let me mention his name. And I should advise you, dear Varvara
Petrovna, not to approach the subject with Liza, you'll only do harm. But if
you hold your tongue she'll begin to talk of it herself, and then you'll learn
more. I believe they'll come together again, if only Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
doesn't put off coming, as he promised."

"I'll write to him at once. If that's how it was, there was nothing in the
quarrel; all nonsense! And I know Darya too well. It's nonsense!"

"I'm sorry for what I said about Dashenka, I did wrong. Their conversations
were quite ordinary and they talked out loud, too. But it all upset me so much
at the time, my dear. And Liza, I saw, got on with her again as affectionately
as before...."

That very day Varvara Petrovna wrote to Nikolay, and begged him to come, if
only one month, earlier than the date he had fixed. But yet she still felt that
there was something unexplained and obscure in the matter. She pondered over it
all the evening and all night. Praskovya's opinion seemed to her too innocent
and sentimental. "Praskovya has always been too sentimental from the old
schooldays upwards," she reflected. "Nicolas is not the man to run away from a
girl's taunts. There's some other reason for it, if there really has been a
breach between them. That officer's here though, they've brought him with them.
As a relation he lives in their house. And, as for Darya, Praskovya was in too
much haste to apologise. She must have kept something to herself, which she
wouldn't tell me."

By the morning Varvara Petrovna had matured a project for putting a stop once
for all to one misunderstanding at least; a project amazing in its
unexpectedness. What was in her heart when she conceived it? It would be hard
to decide and I will not undertake to explain beforehand all the incongruities
of which it was made up. I simply confine myself as chronicler to recording
events precisely as they happened, and it is not my fault if they seem
incredible. Yet I must once more testify that by the morning there was not the
least suspicion of Dasha left in Varvara Petrovna's mind, though in reality
there never had been any--she had too much confidence in her. Besides, she
could not admit the idea that "Nicolas" could be attracted by her Darya. Next
morning when Darya Pavlovna was pouring out tea at the table Varvara Petrovna
looked for a long while intently at her and, perhaps for the twentieth time
since the previous day, repeated to herself: "It's all nonsense!"

All she noticed was that Dasha looked rather tired, and that she was even
quieter and more apathetic than she used to be. After their morning tea,
according to their invariable custom, they sat down to needlework. Varvara
Petrovna demanded from her a full account of her impressions abroad, especially
of nature, of the inhabitants, of the towns, the customs, their arts and
commerce--of everything she had time to observe. She asked no questions about
the Drozdovs or how she had got on with them. Dasha, sitting beside her at the
work-table helping her with the embroidery, talked for half an hour in her
even, monotonous, but rather weak voice.

"Darya!" Varvara Petrovna interrupted suddenly, "is there nothing special you
want to tell me?"

"No, nothing," said Dasha, after a moment's thought, and she glanced at Varvara
Petrovna with her light-coloured eyes.

"Nothing on your soul, on your heart, or your conscience?"

"Nothing," Dasha repeated, quietly, but with a sort of sullen firmness.

"I knew there wasn't! Believe me, Darya, I shall never doubt you. Now sit still
and listen. In front of me, on that chair. I want to see the whole of you.
That's right. Listen, do you want to be married?"

Dasha responded with a long, inquiring, but not greatly astonished look.

"Stay, hold your tongue. In the first place there is a very great difference in
age, but of course you know better than anyone what nonsense that is. You're a
sensible girl, and there must be no mistakes in your life. Besides, he's still
a handsome man... In short, Stepan Trofimovitch, for whom you have always had
such a respect. Well?"

Dasha looked at her still more inquiringly, and this time not simply with
surprise; she blushed perceptibly.

"Stay, hold your tongue, don't be in a hurry! Though you will have money under
my will, yet when I die, what will become of you, even if you have money?
You'll be deceived and robbed of your money, you'll be lost in fact. But
married to him you're the wife of a distinguished man. Look at him on the other
hand. Though I've provided for him, if I die what will become of him? But I
could trust him to you. Stay, I've not finished. He's frivolous, shilly-shally,
cruel, egoistic, he has low habits. But mind you think highly of him, in the
first place because there are many worse. I don't want to get you off my hands
by marrying you to a rascal, you don't imagine anything of that sort, do you?
And, above all, because I ask you, you'll think highly of him,"--

She broke off suddenly and irritably. "Do you hear? Why won't you say
something?"

Dasha still listened and did not speak.

"Stay, wait a little. He's an old woman, but you know, that's all the better
for you. Besides, he's a pathetic old woman. He doesn't deserve to be loved by
a woman at all, but he deserves to be loved for his helplessness, and you must
love him for his helplessness. You understand me, don't you? Do you understand
me?"

Dasha nodded her head affirmatively.

"I knew you would. I expected as much of you. He will love you because he
ought, he ought; he ought to adore you." Varvara Petrovna almost shrieked with
peculiar exasperation. "Besides, he will be in love with you without any ought
about it. I know him. And another thing, I shall always be here. You may be
sure I shall always be here. He will complain of you, he'll begin to say things
against you behind your back, he'll whisper things against you to any stray
person he meets, he'll be for ever whining and whining; he'll write you letters
from one room to another, two a day, but he won't be able to get on without you
all the same, and that's the chief thing. Make him obey you. If you can't make
him you'll be a fool. He'll want to hang himself and threaten, to--don't you
believe it. It's nothing but nonsense. Don't believe it; but still keep a sharp
look-out, you never can tell, and one day he may hang himself. It does happen
with people like that. It's not through strength of will but through weakness
that people hang themselves, and so never drive him to an extreme, that's the
first rule in married life. Remember, too, that he's a poet. Listen, Dasha,
there's no greater happiness than self-sacrifice. And besides, you'll be giving
me great satisfaction and that's the chief thing. Don't think I've been talking
nonsense. I understand what I'm saying. I'm an egoist, you be an egoist, too.
Of course I'm not forcing you. It's entirely for you to decide. As you say, so
it shall be. Well, what's the good of sitting like this. Speak!"

"I don't mind, Varvara Petrovna, if I really must be married," said Dasha
firmly.

"Must? What are you hinting at?" Varvara Petrovna looked sternly and intently
at her.

Dasha was silent, picking at her embroidery canvas with her needle.

"Though you're a clever girl, you're talking nonsense; though it is true that I
have certainly set my heart on marrying you, yet it's not because it's
necessary, but simply because the idea has occurred to me, and only to Stepan
Trofimovitch. If it had not been for Stepan Trofimovitch, I should not have
thought of marrying you yet, though you are twenty.... Well?"

"I'll do as you wish, Varvara Petrovna."

"Then you consent! Stay, be quiet. Why are you in such a hurry? I haven't
finished. In my will I've left you fifteen thousand roubles. I'll give you that
at once, on your wedding-day. You will give eight thousand of it to him; that
is, not to him but to me. He has a debt of eight thousand. I'll pay it, but he
must know that it is done with your money. You'll have seven thousand left in
your hands. Never let him touch a farthing of it. Don't pay his debts ever. If
once you pay them, you'll never be free of them. Besides, I shall always be
here. You shall have twelve hundred roubles a year from me, with extras,
fifteen hundred, besides board and lodging, which shall be at my expense, just
as he has it now. Only you must set up your own servants. Your yearly allowance
shall be paid to you all at once straight into your hands. But be kind, and
sometimes give him something, and let his friends come to see him once a week,
but if they come more often, turn them out. But I shall be here, too. And if I
die, your pension will go on till his death, do you hear, till his death, for
it's his pension, not yours. And besides the seven thousand you'll have now,
which you ought to keep untouched if you're not foolish, I'll leave you another
eight thousand in my will. And you'll get nothing more than that from me, it's
right that you should know it. Come, you consent, eh? Will you say something at
last?"

"I have told you already, Varvara Petrovna."

"Remember that you're free to decide. As you like, so it shall be."

"Then, may I ask, Varvara Petrovna, has Stepan Trofimovitch said anything yet?"

"No, he hasn't said anything, he doesn't know... but he will speak directly."

She jumped up at once and threw on a black shawl. Dasha flushed a little again,
and watched her with questioning eyes. Varvara Petrovna turned suddenly to her
with a face flaming with anger.

"You're a fool!" She swooped down on her like a hawk. "An ungrateful fool!
What's in your mind? Can you imagine that I'd compromise you, in any way, in
the smallest degree. Why, he shall crawl on his knees to ask you, he must be
dying of happiness, that's how it shall be arranged. Why, you know that I'd
never let you suffer. Or do you suppose he'll take you for the sake of that
eight thousand, and that I'm hurrying off to sell you? You're a fool, a fool!
You're all ungrateful fools. Give me my umbrella!"

And she flew off to walk by the wet brick pavements and the wooden planks to
Stepan Trofimovitch's.

