# PART III - CHAPTER V. A WANDERER - III
[Metadata]: # {03.05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05.03}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# III
[TreeTag]: # {03.05.03.01}
First of all he went to Kirillov. It was by now about one o'clock in the night.
Kirillov was standing in the middle of the room.

"Kirillov, my wife is in childbirth."

"How do you mean?"

"Childbirth, bearing a child!"

"You... are not mistaken?"

"Oh, no, no, she is in agonies! I want a woman, any old woman, I must have one
at once.... Can you get one now? You used to have a lot of old women...."

"Very sorry that I am no good at childbearing," Kirillov answered thoughtfully;
"that is, not at childbearing, but at doing anything for childbearing... or...
no, I don't know how to say it."

"You mean you can't assist at a confinement yourself? But that's not what I've
come for. An old woman, I want a woman, a nurse, a servant!"

"You shall have an old woman, but not directly, perhaps... If you like I'll
come instead...."

"Oh, impossible; I am running to Madame Virginsky, the midwife, now."

"A horrid woman!"

"Oh, yes, Kirillov, yes, but she is the best of them all. Yes, it'll all be
without reverence, without gladness, with contempt, with abuse, with blasphemy
in the presence of so great a mystery, the coming of a new creature! Oh, she is
cursing it already!"

"If you like I'll..."

"No, no, but while I'm running (oh, I'll make Madame Virginsky come), will you
go to the foot of my staircase and quietly listen? But don't venture to go in,
you'll frighten her; don't go in on any account, you must only listen... in
case anything dreadful happens. If anything very bad happens, then run in."

"I understand. I've another rouble. Here it is. I meant to have a fowl
to-morrow, but now I don't want to, make haste, run with all your might.
There's a samovar all the night."

Kirillov knew nothing of the present design against Shatov, nor had he had any
idea in the past of the degree of danger that threatened him. He only knew that
Shatov had some old scores with "those people," and although he was to some
extent involved with them himself through instructions he had received from
abroad (not that these were of much consequence, however, for he had never
taken any direct share in anything), yet of late he had given it all up, having
left off doing anything especially for the "cause," and devoted himself
entirely to a life of contemplation. Although Pyotr Stepanovitch had at the
meeting invited Liputin to go with him to Kirillov's to make sure that the
latter would take upon himself, at a given moment, the responsibility for the
"Shatov business," yet in his interview with Kirillov he had said no word about
Shatov nor alluded to him in any way--probably considering it impolitic to do
so, and thinking that Kirillov could not be relied upon. He put off speaking
about it till next day, when it would be all over and would therefore not
matter to Kirillov; such at least was Pyotr Stepanovitch's judgment of him.
Liputin, too, was struck by the fact that Shatov was not mentioned in spite of
what Pyotr Stepanovitch had promised, but he was too much agitated to protest.

Shatov ran like a hurricane to Virginsky's house, cursing the distance and
feeling it endless.

He had to knock a long time at Virginsky's; every one had been asleep a long
while. But Shatov did not scruple to bang at the shutters with all his might.
The dog chained up in the yard dashed about barking furiously. The dogs caught
it up all along the street, and there was a regular babel of barking.

"Why are you knocking and what do you want?" Shatov heard at the window at last
Virginsky's gentle voice, betraying none of the resentment appropriate to the
"outrage." The shutter was pushed back a little and the casement was opened.

"Who's there, what scoundrel is it?" shrilled a female voice which betrayed all
the resentment appropriate to the "outrage." It was the old maid, Virginsky's
relation.

"I am Shatov, my wife has come back to me and she is just confined...."

"Well, let her be, get along."

"I've come for Arina Prohorovna; I won't go without Arina Prohorovna!"

"She can't attend to every one. Practice at night is a special line. Take
yourself off to Maksheyev's and don't dare to make that din," rattled the
exasperated female voice. He could hear Virginsky checking her; but the old
maid pushed him away and would not desist.

"I am not going away!" Shatov cried again.

"Wait a little, wait a little," Virginsky cried at last, overpowering the lady.
"I beg you to wait five minutes, Shatov. I'll wake Arina Prohorovna. Please
don't knock and don't shout.... Oh, how awful it all is!"

After five endless minutes, Arina Prohorovna made her appearance.

"Has your wife come?" Shatov heard her voice at the window, and to his surprise
it was not at all ill-tempered, only as usual peremptory, but Arina Prohorovna
could not speak except in a peremptory tone.

"Yes, my wife, and she is in labour."

"Marya Ignatyevna?"

"Yes, Marya Ignatyevna. Of course it's Marya Ignatyevna."

A silence followed. Shatov waited. He heard a whispering in the house.

"Has she been here long?" Madame Virginsky asked again.

"She came this evening at eight o'clock. Please make haste."

Again he heard whispering, as though they were consulting. "Listen, you are not
making a mistake? Did she send you for me herself?"

"No, she didn't send for you, she wants a peasant woman, so as not to burden me
with expense, but don't be afraid, I'll pay you."

"Very good, I'll come, whether you pay or not. I always thought highly of Marya
Ignatyevna for the independence of her sentiments, though perhaps she won't
remember me. Have you got the most necessary things?"

"I've nothing, but I'll get everything, everything."

"There is something generous even in these people," Shatov reflected, as he set
off to Lyamshin's. "The convictions and the man are two very different things,
very likely I've been very unfair to them!... We are all to blame, we are all
to blame... and if only all were convinced of it!"

He had not to knock long at Lyamshin's; the latter, to Shatov's surprise,
opened his casement at once, jumping out of bed, barefoot and in his
night-clothes at the risk of catching cold; and he was hypochondriacal and
always anxious about his health. But there was a special cause for such
alertness and haste: Lyamshin had been in a tremor all the evening, and had not
been able to sleep for excitement after the meeting of the quintet; he was
haunted by the dread of uninvited and undesired visitors. The news of Shatov's
giving information tormented him more than anything.... And suddenly there was
this terrible loud knocking at the window as though to justify his fears.

He was so frightened at seeing Shatov that he at once slammed the casement and
jumped back into bed. Shatov began furiously knocking and shouting.

"How dare you knock like that in the middle of the night?" shouted Lyamshin, in
a threatening voice, though he was numb with fear, when at least two minutes
later he ventured to open the casement again, and was at last convinced that
Shatov had come alone.

"Here's your revolver for you; take it back, give me fifteen roubles."

"What's the matter, are you drunk? This is outrageous, I shall simply catch
cold. Wait a minute, I'll just throw my rug over me."

"Give me fifteen roubles at once. If you don't give it me, I'll knock and shout
till daybreak; I'll break your window-frame."

"And I'll shout police and you'll be taken to the lock-up."

"And am I dumb? Can't I shout 'police' too? Which of us has most reason to be
afraid of the police, you or I?"

"And you can hold such contemptible opinions! I know what you are hinting
at.... Stop, stop, for God's sake don't go on knocking! Upon my word, who has
money at night? What do you want money for, unless you are drunk?"

"My wife has come back. I've taken ten roubles off the price, I haven't fired
it once; take the revolver, take it this minute!"

Lyamshin mechanically put his hand out of the casement and took the revolver;
he waited a little, and suddenly thrusting his head out of the casement, and
with a shiver running down his spine, faltered as though he were beside
himself.

"You are lying, your wife hasn't come back to you.... It's... it's simply that
you want to run away."

"You are a fool. Where should I run to? It's for your Pyotr Verhovensky to run
away, not for me. I've just been to the midwife, Madame Virginsky, and she
consented at once to come to me. You can ask them. My wife is in agony; I need
the money; give it me!"

A swarm of ideas flared up in Lyamshin's crafty mind like a shower of
fireworks. It all suddenly took a different colour, though still panic
prevented him from reflecting.

"But how... you are not living with your wife?"

"I'll break your skull for questions like that."

"Oh dear, I understand, forgive me, I was struck all of a heap.... But I
understand, I understand... is Arina Prohorovna really coming? You said just
now that she had gone? You know, that's not true. You see, you see, you see
what lies you tell at every step."

"By now, she must be with my wife... don't keep me... it's not my fault you are
a fool."

"That's a lie, I am not a fool. Excuse me, I really can't..."

And utterly distraught he began shutting the casement again for the third time,
but Shatov gave such a yell that he put his head out again.

"But this is simply an unprovoked assault! What do you want of me, what is it,
what is it, formulate it? And think, only think, it's the middle of the night!"

"I want fifteen roubles, you sheep's-head!"

"But perhaps I don't care to take back the revolver. You have no right to force
me. You bought the thing and the matter is settled, and you've no right.... I
can't give you a sum like that in the night, anyhow. Where am I to get a sum
like that?"

"You always have money. I've taken ten roubles off the price, but every one
knows you are a skinflint."

"Come the day after to-morrow, do you hear, the day after to-morrow at twelve
o'clock, and I'll give you the whole of it, that will do, won't it?"

Shatov knocked furiously at the window-frame for the third time.

"Give me ten roubles, and to-morrow early the other five."

"No, the day after to-morrow the other five, to-morrow I swear I shan't have
it. You'd better not come, you'd better not come."

"Give me ten, you scoundrel!"

"Why are you so abusive. Wait a minute, I must light a candle; you've broken
the window.... Nobody swears like that at night. Here you are!" He held a note
to him out of the window.

Shatov seized it--it was a note for five roubles.

"On my honour I can't do more, if you were to murder me, I couldn't; the day
after to-morrow I can give you it all, but now I can do nothing."

"I am not going away!" roared Shatov.

"Very well, take it, here's some more, see, here's some more, and I won't give
more. You can shout at the top of your voice, but I won't give more, I won't,
whatever happens, I won't, I won't."

He was in a perfect frenzy, desperate and perspiring. The two notes he had just
given him were each for a rouble. Shatov had seven roubles altogether now.

"Well, damn you, then, I'll come to-morrow. I'll thrash you, Lyamshin, if you
don't give me the other eight."

"You won't find me at home, you fool!" Lyamshin reflected quickly.

"Stay, stay!" he shouted frantically after Shatov, who was already running off.
"Stay, come back. Tell me please, is it true what you said that your wife has
come back?"

"Fool!" cried Shatov, with a gesture of disgust, and ran home as hard as he
could.

