# PART I - CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING. - III
[Metadata]: # {01.02.03}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING.
III
# III
At last the interview with the governor took place too. Our dear, mild, Ivan
Ossipovitch had only just returned and only just had time to hear the angry
complaint from the club. There was no doubt that something must be done, but he
was troubled. The hospitable old man seemed also rather afraid of his young
kinsman. He made up his mind, however, to induce him to apologise to the club
and to his victim in satisfactory form, and, if required, by letter, and then
to persuade him to leave us for a time, travelling, for instance, to improve
his mind, in Italy, or in fact anywhere abroad. In the waiting-room in which on
this occasion he received Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch (who had been at other times
privileged as a relation to wander all over the house unchecked), Alyosha
Telyatnikov, a clerk of refined manners, who was also a member of the
governor's household, was sitting in a corner opening envelopes at a table, and
in the next room, at the window nearest to the door, a stout and sturdy
colonel, a former friend and colleague of the governor, was sitting alone
reading the Golos, paying no attention, of course, to what was taking place in
the waiting-room; in fact, he had his back turned. Ivan Ossipovitch approached
the subject in a roundabout way, almost in a whisper, but kept getting a little
muddled. Nikolay looked anything but cordial, not at all as a relation should.
He was pale and sat looking down and continually moving his eyebrows as though
trying to control acute pain.

"You have a kind heart and a generous one, Nicolas," the old man put in among
other things, "you're a man of great culture, you've grown up in the highest
circles, and here too your behaviour has hitherto been a model, which has been
a great consolation to your mother, who is so precious to all of us.... And now
again everything has appeared in such an unaccountable light, so detrimental to
all! I speak as a friend of your family, as an old man who loves you sincerely
and a relation, at whose words you cannot take offence.... Tell me, what drives
you to such reckless proceedings so contrary to all accepted rules and habits?
What can be the meaning of such acts which seem almost like outbreaks of
delirium?"

Nikolay listened with vexation and impatience. All at once there was a gleam of
something sly and mocking in his eyes.

"I'll tell you what drives me to it," he said sullenly, and looking round him
he bent down to Ivan Ossipovitch's ear. The refined Alyosha Telyatnikov moved
three steps farther away towards the window, and the colonel coughed over the
Golos. Poor Ivan Ossipovitch hurriedly and trustfully inclined his ear; he was
exceedingly curious. And then something utterly incredible, though on the other
side only too unmistakable, took place. The old man suddenly felt that, instead
of telling him some interesting secret, Nikolay had seized the upper part of
his ear between his teeth and was nipping it rather hard. He shuddered, and
breath failed him.

"Nicolas, this is beyond a joke!" he moaned mechanically in a voice not his
own.

Alyosha and the colonel had not yet grasped the situation, besides they
couldn't see, and fancied up to the end that the two were whispering together;
and yet the old man's desperate face alarmed them. They looked at one another
with wide-open eyes, not knowing whether to rush to his assistance as agreed or
to wait. Nikolay noticed this perhaps, and bit the harder.

"Nicolas! Nicolas!" his victim moaned again, "come... you've had your joke,
that's enough!"

In another moment the poor governor would certainly have died of terror; but
the monster had mercy on him, and let go his ear. The old man's deadly terror
lasted for a full minute, and it was followed by a sort of fit. Within half an
hour Nikolay was arrested and removed for the time to the guard-room, where he
was confined in a special cell, with a special sentinel at the door. This
decision was a harsh one, but our mild governor was so angry that he was
prepared to take the responsibility even if he had to face Varvara Petrovna. To
the general amazement, when this lady arrived at the governor's in haste and in
nervous irritation to discuss the matter with him at once, she was refused
admittance, whereupon, without getting out of the carriage, she returned home,
unable to believe her senses.

And at last everything was explained! At two o'clock in the morning the
prisoner, who had till then been calm and had even slept, suddenly became
noisy, began furiously beating on the door with his fists,--with unnatural
strength wrenched the iron grating off the door, broke the window, and cut his
hands all over. When the officer on duty ran with a detachment of men and the
keys and ordered the cell to be opened that they might rush in and bind the
maniac, it appeared that he was suffering from acute brain fever. He was taken
home to his mother.

Everything was explained at once. All our three doctors gave it as their
opinion that the patient might well have been in a delirious state for three
days before, and that though he might have apparently been in possession of
full consciousness and cunning, yet he might have been deprived of common sense
and will, which was indeed borne out by the facts. So it turned out that
Liputin had guessed the truth sooner than any one. Ivan Ossipovitch, who was a
man of delicacy and feeling, was completely abashed. But what was striking was
that he, too, had considered Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch capable of any mad action
even when in the full possession of his faculties. At the club, too, people
were ashamed and wondered how it was they had failed to "see the elephant" and
had missed the only explanation of all these marvels: there were, of course,
sceptics among them, but they could not long maintain their position.

Nikolay was in bed for more than two months. A famous doctor was summoned from
Moscow for a consultation; the whole town called on Varvara Petrovna. She
forgave them. When in the spring Nikolay had completely recovered and assented
without discussion to his mother's proposal that he should go for a tour to
Italy, she begged him further to pay visits of farewell to all the neighbours,
and so far as possible to apologise where necessary. Nikolay agreed with great
alacrity. It became known at the club that he had had a most delicate
explanation with Pyotr Pavlovitch Gaganov, at the house of the latter, who had
been completely satisfied with his apology. As he went round to pay these calls
Nikolay was very grave and even gloomy. Every one appeared to receive him
sympathetically, but everybody seemed embarrassed and glad that he was going to
Italy. Ivan Ossipovitch was positively tearful, but was, for some reason,
unable to bring himself to embrace him, even at the final leave-taking. It is
true that some of us retained the conviction that the scamp had simply been
making fun of us, and that the illness was neither here nor there. He went to
see Liputin too.

"Tell me," he said, "how could you guess beforehand what I should say about
your sense and prime Agafya with an answer to it?"

"Why," laughed Liputin, "it was because I recognised that you were a clever
man, and so I foresaw what your answer would be."

"Anyway, it was a remarkable coincidence. But, excuse me, did you consider me a
sensible man and not insane when you sent Agafya?"

"For the cleverest and most rational, and I only pretended to believe that you
were insane.... And you guessed at once what was in my mind, and sent a
testimonial to my wit through Agafya."

"Well, there you're a little mistaken. I really was... unwell..." muttered
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, frowning. "Bah!" he cried, "do you suppose I'm capable
of attacking people when I'm in my senses? What object would there be in it?"

Liputin shrank together and didn't know what to answer. Nikolay turned pale or,
at least, so it seemed to Liputin.

"You have a very peculiar way of looking at things, anyhow," Nikolay went on,
"but as for Agafya, I understand, of course, that you simply sent her to be
rude to me."

"I couldn't challenge you to a duel, could I?"

"Oh, no, of course! I seem to have heard that you're not fond of duels...."

"Why borrow from the French?" said Liputin, doubling up again.

"You're for nationalism, then?"

Liputin shrank into himself more than ever.

"Bah, bah! What do I see?" cried Nicolas, noticing a volume of Consid√©rant in
the most conspicuous place on the table. "You don't mean to say you're a
Fourierist! I'm afraid you must be! And isn't this too borrowing from the
French?" he laughed, tapping the book with his finger.

"No, that's not taken from the French," Liputin cried with positive fury,
jumping up from his chair. "That is taken from the universal language of
humanity, not simply from the French. From the language of the universal social
republic and harmony of mankind, let me tell you! Not simply from the French!"

"Foo! hang it all! There's no such language!" laughed Nikolay.

Sometimes a trifle will catch the attention and exclusively absorb it for a
time. Most of what I have to tell of young Stavrogin will come later. But I
will note now as a curious fact that of all the impressions made on him by his
stay in our town, the one most sharply imprinted on his memory was the
unsightly and almost abject figure of the little provincial official, the
coarse and jealous family despot, the miserly money-lender who picked up the
candle-ends and scraps left from dinner, and was at the same time a passionate
believer in some visionary future "social harmony," who at night gloated in
ecstasies over fantastic pictures of a future phalanstery, in the approaching
realisation of which, in Russia, and in our province, he believed as firmly as
in his own existence. And that in the very place where he had saved up to buy
himself a "little home," where he had married for the second time, getting a
dowry with his bride, where perhaps, for a hundred miles round there was not
one man, himself included, who was the very least like a future member "of the
universal human republic and social harmony."

"God knows how these people come to exist!" Nikolay wondered, recalling
sometimes the unlooked-for Fourierist.

