# PART II - CHAPTER IV. ALL IN EXPECTATION - II
[Metadata]: # {02.04.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.04.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER IV. ALL IN EXPECTATION
II
# II
He went to the "old man" straight from Varvara Petrovna's, and he was in such
haste simply from spite, that he might revenge himself for an insult of which I
had no idea at that time. The fact is that at their last interview on the
Thursday of the previous week, Stepan Trofimovitch, though the dispute was one
of his own beginning, had ended by turning Pyotr Stepanovitch out with his
stick. He concealed the incident from me at the time. But now, as soon as Pyotr
Stepanovitch ran in with his everlasting grin, which was so na√Øvely
condescending, and his unpleasantly inquisitive eyes peering into every corner,
Stepan Trofimovitch at once made a signal aside to me, not to leave the room.
This was how their real relations came to be exposed before me, for on this
occasion I heard their whole conversation.

Stepan Trofimovitch was sitting stretched out on a lounge. He had grown thin
and sallow since that Thursday. Pyotr Stepanovitch seated himself beside him
with a most familiar air, unceremoniously tucking his legs up under him, and
taking up more room on the lounge than deference to his father should have
allowed. Stepan Trofimovitch moved aside, in silence, and with dignity.

On the table lay an open book. It was the novel, "What's to be done?" Alas, I
must confess one strange weakness in my friend; the fantasy that he ought to
come forth from his solitude and fight a last battle was getting more and more
hold upon his deluded imagination. I guessed that he had got the novel and was
_studying_ it solely in order that when the inevitable conflict with the
"shriekers" came about he might know their methods and arguments beforehand,
from their very "catechism," and in that way be prepared to confute them all
triumphantly, _before her eyes._ Oh, how that book tortured him! He sometimes
flung it aside in despair, and leaping up, paced about the room almost in a
frenzy.

"I agree that the author's fundamental idea is a true one," he said to me
feverishly, "but that only makes it more awful. It's just our idea, exactly
ours; we first sowed the seed, nurtured it, prepared the way, and, indeed, what
could they say new, after us? But, heavens! How it's all expressed, distorted,
mutilated!" he exclaimed, tapping the book with his fingers. "Were these the
conclusions we were striving for? Who can understand the original idea in
this?"

"Improving your mind?" sniggered Pyotr Stepanovitch, taking the book from the
table and reading the title. "It's high time. I'll bring you better, if you
like."

Stepan Trofimovitch again preserved a dignified silence. I was sitting on a
sofa in the corner.

Pyotr Stepanovitch quickly explained the reason of his coming. Of course,
Stepan Trofimovitch was absolutely staggered, and he listened in alarm, which
was mixed with extreme indignation.

"And that Yulia Mihailovna counts on my coming to read for her!"

"Well, they're by no means in such need of you. On the contrary, it's by way of
an attention to you, so as to make up to Varvara Petrovna. But, of course, you
won't dare to refuse, and I expect you want to yourself," he added with a grin.
"You old fogies are all so devilishly ambitious. But, I say though, you must
look out that it's not too boring. What have you got? Spanish history, or what
is it? You'd better let me look at it three days beforehand, or else you'll put
us to sleep perhaps."

The hurried and too barefaced coarseness of these thrusts was obviously
premeditated. He affected to behave as though it were impossible to talk to
Stepan Trofimovitch in different and more delicate language. Stepan
Trofimovitch resolutely persisted in ignoring his insults, but what his son
told him made a more and more overwhelming impression upon him.

"And she, she herself sent me this message through you?" he asked, turning
pale.

"Well, you see, she means to fix a time and place for a mutual explanation, the
relics of your sentimentalising. You've been coquetting with her for twenty
years and have trained her to the most ridiculous habits. But don't trouble
yourself, it's quite different now. She keeps saying herself that she's only
beginning now to 'have her eyes opened.' I told her in so many words that all
this friendship of yours is nothing but a mutual pouring forth of sloppiness.
She told me lots, my boy. Foo! what a flunkey's place you've been filling all
this time. I positively blushed for you."

"I filling a flunkey's place?" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, unable to restrain
himself.

"Worse, you've been a parasite, that is, a voluntary flunkey too lazy to work,
while you've an appetite for money. She, too, understands all that now. It's
awful the things she's been telling me about you, anyway. I did laugh, my boy,
over your letters to her; shameful and disgusting. But you're all so depraved,
so depraved! There's always something depraving in charity--you're a good
example of it!"

"She showed you my letters!"

"All; though, of course, one couldn't read them all. Foo, what a lot of paper
you've covered! I believe there are more than two thousand letters there. And
do you know, old chap, I believe there was one moment when she'd have been
ready to marry you. You let slip your chance in the silliest way. Of course,
I'm speaking from your point of view, though, anyway, it would have been better
than now when you've almost been married to 'cover another man's sins,' like a
buffoon, for a jest, for money."

"For money! She, she says it was for money!" Stepan Trofimovitch wailed in
anguish.

"What else, then? But, of course, I stood up for you. That's your only line of
defence, you know. She sees for herself that you needed money like every one
else, and that from that point of view maybe you were right. I proved to her as
clear as twice two makes four that it was a mutual bargain. She was a
capitalist and you were a sentimental buffoon in her service. She's not angry
about the money, though you have milked her like a goat. She's only in a rage
at having believed in you for twenty years, at your having so taken her in over
these noble sentiments, and made her tell lies for so long. She never will
admit that she told lies of herself, but you'll catch it the more for that. I
can't make out how it was you didn't see that you'd have to have a day of
reckoning. For after all you had some sense. I advised her yesterday to put you
in an almshouse, a genteel one, don't disturb yourself; there'll be nothing
humiliating; I believe that's what she'll do. Do you remember your last letter
to me, three weeks ago?"

"Can you have shown her that?" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, leaping up in horror.

"Rather! First thing. The one in which you told me she was exploiting you,
envious of your talent; oh, yes, and that about 'other men's sins.' You have
got a conceit though, my boy! How I did laugh. As a rule your letters are very
tedious. You write a horrible style. I often don't read them at all, and I've
one lying about to this day, unopened. I'll send it to you to-morrow. But that
one, that last letter of yours was the tiptop of perfection! How I did laugh!
Oh, how I laughed!"

"Monster, monster!" wailed Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Foo, damn it all, there's no talking to you. I say, you're getting huffy again
as you were last Thursday."

Stepan Trofimovitch drew himself up, menacingly.

"How dare you speak to me in such language?"

"What language? It's simple and clear."

"Tell me, you monster, are you my son or not?"

"You know that best. To be sure all fathers are disposed to be blind in such
cases."

"Silence! Silence!" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, shaking all over.

"You see you're screaming and swearing at me as you did last Thursday. You
tried to lift your stick against me, but you know, I found that document. I was
rummaging all the evening in my trunk from curiosity. It's true there's nothing
definite, you can take that comfort. It's only a letter of my mother's to that
Pole. But to judge from her character..."

"Another word and I'll box your ears."

"What a set of people!" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, suddenly addressing himself to
me. "You see, this is how we've been ever since last Thursday. I'm glad you're
here this time, anyway, and can judge between us. To begin with, a fact: he
reproaches me for speaking like this of my mother, but didn't he egg me on to
it? In Petersburg before I left the High School, didn't he wake me twice in the
night, to embrace me, and cry like a woman, and what do you suppose he talked
to me about at night? Why, the same modest anecdotes about my mother! It was
from him I first heard them."

"Oh, I meant that in a higher sense! Oh, you didn't understand me! You
understood nothing, nothing."

"But, anyway, it was meaner in you than in me, meaner, acknowledge that. You
see, it's nothing to me if you like. I'm speaking from your point of view.
Don't worry about my point of view. I don't blame my mother; if it's you, then
it's you, if it's a Pole, then it's a Pole, it's all the same to me. I'm not to
blame because you and she managed so stupidly in Berlin. As though you could
have managed things better. Aren't you an absurd set, after that? And does it
matter to you whether I'm your son or not? Listen," he went on, turning to me
again, "he's never spent a penny on me all his life; till I was sixteen he
didn't know me at all; afterwards he robbed me here, and now he cries out that
his heart has been aching over me all his life, and carries on before me like
an actor. I'm not Varvara Petrovna, mind you."

He got up and took his hat.

"I curse you henceforth!"

Stepan Trofimovitch, as pale as death, stretched out his hand above him.

"Ach, what folly a man will descend to!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, actually
surprised. "Well, good-bye, old fellow, I shall never come and see you again.
Send me the article beforehand, don't forget, and try and let it be free from
nonsense. Facts, facts, facts. And above all, let it be short. Good-bye."

