# PART I - CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY - II
[Metadata]: # {01.01.02}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY
II
# II
Of course I don't assert that he had never suffered for his convictions at all,
but I am fully convinced that he might have gone on lecturing on his Arabs as
long as he liked, if he had only given the necessary explanations. But he was
too lofty, and he proceeded with peculiar haste to assure himself that his
career was ruined forever "by the vortex of circumstance." And if the whole
truth is to be told the real cause of the change in his career was the very
delicate proposition which had been made before and was then renewed by Varvara
Petrovna Stavrogin, a lady of great wealth, the wife of a lieutenant-general,
that he should undertake the education and the whole intellectual development
of her only son in the capacity of a superior sort of teacher and friend, to
say nothing of a magnificent salary. This proposal had been made to him the
first time in Berlin, at the moment when he was first left a widower. His first
wife was a frivolous girl from our province, whom he married in his early and
unthinking youth, and apparently he had had a great deal of trouble with this
young person, charming as she was, owing to the lack of means for her support;
and also from other, more delicate, reasons. She died in Paris after three
years' separation from him, leaving him a son of five years old; "the fruit of
our first, joyous, and unclouded love," were the words the sorrowing father
once let fall in my presence.

The child had, from the first, been sent back to Russia, where he was brought
up in the charge of distant cousins in some remote region. Stepan Trofimovitch
had declined Varvara Petrovna's proposal on that occasion and had quickly
married again, before the year was over, a taciturn Berlin girl, and, what
makes it more strange, there was no particular necessity for him to do so. But
apart from his marriage there were, it appears, other reasons for his declining
the situation. He was tempted by the resounding fame of a professor, celebrated
at that time, and he, in his turn, hastened to the lecturer's chair for which
he had been preparing himself, to try his eagle wings in flight. But now with
singed wings he naturally remembered the proposition which even then had made
him hesitate. The sudden death of his second wife, who did not live a year with
him, settled the matter decisively. To put it plainly it was all brought about
by the passionate sympathy and priceless, so to speak, classic friendship of
Varvara Petrovna, if one may use such an expression of friendship. He flung
himself into the arms of this friendship, and his position was settled for more
than twenty years. I use the expression "flung himself into the arms of," but
God forbid that anyone should fly to idle and superfluous conclusions. These
embraces must be understood only in the most loftily moral sense. The most
refined and delicate tie united these two beings, both so remarkable, forever.

The post of tutor was the more readily accepted too, as the property--a very
small one--left to Stepan Trofimovitch by his first wife was close to
Skvoreshniki, the Stavrogins' magnificent estate on the outskirts of our
provincial town. Besides, in the stillness of his study, far from the immense
burden of university work, it was always possible to devote himself to the
service of science, and to enrich the literature of his country with erudite
studies. These works did not appear. But on the other hand it did appear
possible to spend the rest of his life, more than twenty years, "a reproach
incarnate," so to speak, to his native country, in the words of a popular poet:

_Reproach incarnate thou didst stand_ _Erect before thy Fatherland,_ _O Liberal
idealist!_

But the person to whom the popular poet referred may perhaps have had the right
to adopt that pose for the rest of his life if he had wished to do so, though
it must have been tedious. Our Stepan Trofimovitch was, to tell the truth, only
an imitator compared with such people; moreover, he had grown weary of standing
erect and often lay down for a while. But, to do him justice, the "incarnation
of reproach" was preserved even in the recumbent attitude, the more so as that
was quite sufficient for the province. You should have seen him at our club
when he sat down to cards. His whole figure seemed to exclaim "Cards! Me sit
down to whist with you! Is it consistent? Who is responsible for it? Who has
shattered my energies and turned them to whist? Ah, perish, Russia!" and he
would majestically trump with a heart.

And to tell the truth he dearly loved a game of cards, which led him,
especially in later years, into frequent and unpleasant skirmishes with Varvara
Petrovna, particularly as he was always losing. But of that later. I will only
observe that he was a man of tender conscience (that is, sometimes) and so was
often depressed. In the course of his twenty years' friendship with Varvara
Petrovna he used regularly, three or four times a year, to sink into a state of
"patriotic grief," as it was called among us, or rather really into an attack
of spleen, but our estimable Varvara Petrovna preferred the former phrase. Of
late years his grief had begun to be not only patriotic, but at times alcoholic
too; but Varvara Petrovna's alertness succeeded in keeping him all his life
from trivial inclinations. And he needed someone to look after him indeed, for
he sometimes behaved very oddly: in the midst of his exalted sorrow he would
begin laughing like any simple peasant. There were moments when he began to
take a humorous tone even about himself. But there was nothing Varvara Petrovna
dreaded so much as a humorous tone. She was a woman of the classic type, a
female MÃ¦cenas, invariably guided only by the highest considerations. The
influence of this exalted lady over her poor friend for twenty years is a fact
of the first importance. I shall need to speak of her more particularly, which
I now proceed to do.

