# PART II - CHAPTER I. NIGHT - I
[Metadata]: # {02.01.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {02.01.01.01}
EIGHT DAYS HAD PASSED. Now that it is all over and I am writing a record of it,
we know all about it; but at the time we knew nothing, and it was natural that
many things should seem strange to us: Stepan Trofimovitch and I, anyway, shut
ourselves up for the first part of the time, and looked on with dismay from a
distance. I did, indeed, go about here and there, and, as before, brought him
various items of news, without which he could not exist.

I need hardly say that there were rumours of the most varied kind going about
the town in regard to the blow that Stavrogin had received, Lizaveta
Nikolaevna's fainting fit, and all that happened on that Sunday. But what we
wondered was, through whom the story had got about so quickly and so
accurately. Not one of the persons present had any need to give away the secret
of what had happened, or interest to serve by doing so.

The servants had not been present. Lebyadkin was the only one who might have
chattered, not so much from spite, for he had gone out in great alarm (and fear
of an enemy destroys spite against him), but simply from incontinence of
speech. But Lebyadkin and his sister had disappeared next day, and nothing
could be heard of them. There was no trace of them at Filipov's house, they had
moved, no one knew where, and seemed to have vanished. Shatov, of whom I wanted
to inquire about Marya Timofyevna, would not open his door, and I believe sat
locked up in his room for the whole of those eight days, even discontinuing his
work in the town. He would not see me. I went to see him on Tuesday and knocked
at his door. I got no answer, but being convinced by unmistakable evidence that
he was at home, I knocked a second time. Then, jumping up, apparently from his
bed, he strode to the door and shouted at the top of his voice:

"Shatov is not at home!"

With that I went away.

Stepan Trofimovitch and I, not without dismay at the boldness of the
supposition, though we tried to encourage one another, reached at last a
conclusion: we made up our mind that the only person who could be responsible
for spreading these rumours was Pyotr Stepanovitch, though he himself not long
after assured his father that he had found the story on every one's lips,
especially at the club, and that the governor and his wife were familiar with
every detail of it. What is even more remarkable is that the next day, Monday
evening, I met Liputin, and he knew every word that had been passed, so that he
must have heard it first-hand. Many of the ladies (and some of the leading
ones) were very inquisitive about the "mysterious cripple," as they called
Marya Timofyevna. There were some, indeed, who were anxious to see her and make
her acquaintance, so the intervention of the persons who had been in such haste
to conceal the Lebyadkins was timely. But Lizaveta Nikolaevna's fainting
certainly took the foremost place in the story, and "all society" was
interested, if only because it directly concerned Yulia Mihailovna, as the
kinswoman and patroness of the young lady. And what was there they didn't say!
What increased the gossip was the mysterious position of affairs; both houses
were obstinately closed; Lizaveta Nikolaevna, so they said, was in bed with
brain fever. The same thing was asserted of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with the
revolting addition of a tooth knocked out and a swollen face. It was even
whispered in corners that there would soon be murder among us, that Stavrogin
was not the man to put up with such an insult, and that he would kill Shatov,
but with the secrecy of a Corsican vendetta. People liked this idea, but the
majority of our young people listened with contempt, and with an air of the
most nonchalant indifference, which was, of course, assumed. The old hostility
to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch in the town was in general strikingly manifest. Even
sober-minded people were eager to throw blame on him though they could not have
said for what. It was whispered that he had ruined Lizaveta Nikolaevna's
reputation, and that there had been an intrigue between them in Switzerland.
Cautious people, of course, restrained themselves, but all listened with
relish. There were other things said, though not in public, but in private, on
rare occasions and almost in secret, extremely strange things, to which I only
refer to warn my readers of them with a view to the later events of my story.
Some people, with knitted brows, said, God knows on what foundation, that
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had some special business in our province, that he had,
through Count K., been brought into touch with exalted circles in Petersburg,
that he was even, perhaps, in government service, and might almost be said to
have been furnished with some sort of commission from someone. When very
sober-minded and sensible people smiled at this rumour, observing very
reasonably that a man always mixed up with scandals, and who was beginning his
career among us with a swollen face did not look like a government official,
they were told in a whisper that he was employed not in the official, but, so
to say, the confidential service, and that in such cases it was essential to be
as little like an official as possible. This remark produced a sensation; we
knew that the Zemstvo of our province was the object of marked attention in the
capital. I repeat, these were only flitting rumours that disappeared for a time
when Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch first came among us. But I may observe that many
of the rumours were partly due to a few brief but malicious words, vaguely and
disconnectedly dropped at the club by a gentleman who had lately returned from
Petersburg. This was a retired captain in the guards, Artemy Pavlovitch
Gaganov. He was a very large landowner in our province and district, a man used
to the society of Petersburg, and a son of the late Pavel Pavlovitch Gaganov,
the venerable old man with whom Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had, over four years
before, had the extraordinarily coarse and sudden encounter which I have
described already in the beginning of my story.

It immediately became known to every one that Yulia Mihailovna had made a
special call on Varvara Petrovna, and had been informed at the entrance: "Her
honour was too unwell to see visitors." It was known, too, that Yulia
Mihailovna sent a message two days later to inquire after Varvara Petrovna's
health. At last she began "defending" Varvara Petrovna everywhere, of course
only in the loftiest sense, that is, in the vaguest possible way. She listened
coldly and sternly to the hurried remarks made at first about the scene on
Sunday, so that during the later days they were not renewed in her presence. So
that the belief gained ground everywhere that Yulia Mihailovna knew not only
the whole of the mysterious story but all its secret significance to the
smallest detail, and not as an outsider, but as one taking part in it. I may
observe, by the way, that she was already gradually beginning to gain that
exalted influence among us for which she was so eager and which she was
certainly struggling to win, and was already beginning to see herself
"surrounded by a circle." A section of society recognised her practical sense
and tact... but of that later. Her patronage partly explained Pyotr
Stepanovitch's rapid success in our society--a success with which Stepan
Trofimovitch was particularly impressed at the time.

We possibly exaggerated it. To begin with, Pyotr Stepanovitch seemed to make
acquaintance almost instantly with the whole town within the first four days of
his arrival. He only arrived on Sunday; and on Tuesday I saw him in a carriage
with Artemy Pavlovitch Gaganov, a man who was proud, irritable, and
supercilious, in spite of his good breeding, and who was not easy to get on
with. At the governor's, too, Pyotr Stepanovitch met with a warm welcome, so
much so that he was at once on an intimate footing, like a young friend,
treated, so to say, affectionately. He dined with Yulia Mihailovna almost every
day. He had made her acquaintance in Switzerland, but there was certainly
something curious about the rapidity of his success in the governor's house. In
any case he was reputed, whether truly or not, to have been at one time a
revolutionist abroad, he had had something to do with some publications and
some congresses abroad, "which one can prove from the newspapers," to quote the
malicious remark of Alyosha Telyatnikov, who had also been once a young friend
affectionately treated in the house of the late governor, but was now, alas, a
clerk on the retired list. But the fact was unmistakable: the former
revolutionist, far from being hindered from returning to his beloved
Fatherland, seemed almost to have been encouraged to do so, so perhaps there
was nothing in it. Liputin whispered to me once that there were rumours that
Pyotr Stepanovitch had once professed himself penitent, and on his return had
been pardoned on mentioning certain names and so, perhaps, had succeeded in
expiating his offence, by promising to be of use to the government in the
future. I repeated these malignant phrases to Stepan Trofimovitch, and although
the latter was in such a state that he was hardly capable of reflection, he
pondered profoundly. It turned out later that Pyotr Stepanovitch had come to us
with a very influential letter of recommendation, that he had, at any rate,
brought one to the governor's wife from a very important old lady in
Petersburg, whose husband was one of the most distinguished old dignitaries in
the capital. This old lady, who was Yulia Mihailovna's godmother, mentioned in
her letter that Count K. knew Pyotr Stepanovitch very well through Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, made much of him, and thought him "a very excellent young man
in spite of his former errors." Yulia Mihailovna set the greatest value on her
relations with the "higher spheres," which were few and maintained with
difficulty, and was, no doubt, pleased to get the old lady's letter, but still
there was something peculiar about it. She even forced her husband upon a
familiar footing with Pyotr Stepanovitch, so much so that Mr. von Lembke
complained of it... but of that, too, later. I may mention, too, that the great
author was also favourably disposed to Pyotr Stepanovitch, and at once invited
him to go and see him. Such alacrity on the part of a man so puffed up with
conceit stung Stepan Trofimovitch more painfully than anything; but I put a
different interpretation on it. In inviting a nihilist to see him, Mr.
Karmazinov, no doubt, had in view his relations with the progressives of the
younger generation in both capitals. The great author trembled nervously before
the revolutionary youth of Russia, and imagining, in his ignorance, that the
future lay in their hands, fawned upon them in a despicable way, chiefly
because they paid no attention to him whatever.

