# PART III - CHAPTER VI. A BUSY NIGHT - III
[Metadata]: # {03.06.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.06.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER VI. A BUSY NIGHT
III
# III
Precisely at ten minutes to six Pyotr Stepanovitch and Erkel were walking up
and down the platform at the railway-station beside a rather long train. Pyotr
Stepanovitch was setting off and Erkel was saying good-bye to him. The luggage
was in, and his bag was in the seat he had taken in a second-class carriage.
The first bell had rung already; they were waiting for the second. Pyotr
Stepanovitch looked about him, openly watching the passengers as they got into
the train. But he did not meet anyone he knew well; only twice he nodded to
acquaintances--a merchant whom he knew slightly, and then a young village
priest who was going to his parish two stations away. Erkel evidently wanted to
speak of something of importance in the last moments, though possibly he did
not himself know exactly of what, but he could not bring himself to begin! He
kept fancying that Pyotr Stepanovitch seemed anxious to get rid of him and was
impatient for the last bell.

"You look at every one so openly," he observed with some timidity, as though he
would have warned him.

"Why not? It would not do for me to conceal myself at present. It's too soon.
Don't be uneasy. All I am afraid of is that the devil might send Liputin this
way; he might scent me out and race off here."

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, they are not to be trusted," Erkel brought out resolutely.

"Liputin?"

"None of them, Pyotr Stepanovitch."

"Nonsense! they are all bound by what happened yesterday. There isn't one who
would turn traitor. People won't go to certain destruction unless they've lost
their reason."

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, but they will lose their reason." Evidently that idea had
already occurred to Pyotr Stepanovitch too, and so Erkel's observation
irritated him the more.

"You are not in a funk too, are you, Erkel? I rely on you more than on any of
them. I've seen now what each of them is worth. Tell them to-day all I've told
you. I leave them in your charge. Go round to each of them this morning. Read
them my written instructions to-morrow, or the day after, when you are all
together and they are capable of listening again... and believe me, they will
be by to-morrow, for they'll be in an awful funk, and that will make them as
soft as wax.... The great thing is that you shouldn't be downhearted."

"Ach, Pyotr Stepanovitch, it would be better if you weren't going away."

"But I am only going for a few days; I shall be back in no time."

"Pyotr Stepanovitch," Erkel brought out warily but resolutely, "what if you
were going to Petersburg? Of course, I understand that you are only doing
what's necessary for the cause."

"I expected as much from you, Erkel. If you have guessed that I am going to
Petersburg you can realise that I couldn't tell them yesterday, at that moment,
that I was going so far for fear of frightening them. You saw for yourself what
a state they were in. But you understand that I am going for the cause, for
work of the first importance, for the common cause, and not to save my skin, as
Liputin imagines."

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, what if you were going abroad? I should understand... I
should understand that you must be careful of yourself because you are
everything and we are nothing. I shall understand, Pyotr Stepanovitch." The
poor boy's voice actually quivered.

"Thank you, Erkel.... Aie, you've touched my bad finger." (Erkel had pressed
his hand awkwardly; the bad finger was discreetly bound up in black silk.) "But
I tell you positively again that I am going to Petersburg only to sniff round,
and perhaps shall only be there for twenty-four hours and then back here again
at once. When I come back I shall stay at Gaganov's country place for the sake
of appearances. If there is any notion of danger, I should be the first to take
the lead and share it. If I stay longer in Petersburg I'll let you know at once
... in the way we've arranged, and you'll tell them." The second bell rang.

"Ah, then there's only five minutes before the train starts. I don't want the
group here to break up, you know. I am not afraid; don't be anxious about me. I
have plenty of such centres, and it's not much consequence; but there's no harm
in having as many centres as possible. But I am quite at ease about you, though
I am leaving you almost alone with those idiots. Don't be uneasy; they won't
turn traitor, they won't have the pluck.... Ha ha, you going to-day too?" he
cried suddenly in a quite different, cheerful voice to a very young man, who
came up gaily to greet him. "I didn't know you were going by the express too.
Where are you off to... your mother's?"

The mother of the young man was a very wealthy landowner in a neighbouring
province, and the young man was a distant relation of Yulia Mihailovna's and
had been staying about a fortnight in our town.

"No, I am going farther, to R----. I've eight hours to live through in the
train. Off to Petersburg?" laughed the young man.

"What makes you suppose I must be going to Petersburg?" said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, laughing even more openly.

The young man shook his gloved finger at him.

"Well, you've guessed right," Pyotr Stepanovitch whispered to him mysteriously.
"I am going with letters from Yulia Mihailovna and have to call on three or
four personages, as you can imagine--bother them all, to speak candidly. It's a
beastly job!"

"But why is she in such a panic? Tell me," the young man whispered too. "She
wouldn't see even me yesterday. I don't think she has anything to fear for her
husband, quite the contrary; he fell down so creditably at the fire--ready to
sacrifice his life, so to speak."

"Well, there it is," laughed Pyotr Stepanovitch. "You see, she is afraid that
people may have written from here already... that is, some gentlemen.... The
fact is, Stavrogin is at the bottom of it, or rather Prince K.... Ech, it's a
long story; I'll tell you something about it on the journey if you like--as far
as my chivalrous feelings will allow me, at least.... This is my relation,
Lieutenant Erkel, who lives down here."

The young man, who had been stealthily glancing at Erkel, touched his hat;
Erkel made a bow.

"But I say, Verhovensky, eight hours in the train is an awful ordeal. Berestov,
the colonel, an awfully funny fellow, is travelling with me in the first class.
He is a neighbour of ours in the country, and his wife is a Garin (_n√©e_ de
Garine), and you know he is a very decent fellow. He's got ideas too. He's only
been here a couple of days. He's passionately fond of whist; couldn't we get up
a game, eh? I've already fixed on a fourth--Pripuhlov, our merchant from
T----with a beard, a millionaire--I mean it, a real millionaire; you can take
my word for it.... I'll introduce you; he is a very interesting money-bag. We
shall have a laugh."

"I shall be delighted, and I am awfully fond of cards in the train, but I am
going second class."

"Nonsense, that's no matter. Get in with us. I'll tell them directly to move
you to the first class. The chief guard would do anything I tell him. What have
you got?... a bag? a rug?"

"First-rate. Come along!"

Pyotr Stepanovitch took his bag, his rug, and his book, and at once and with
alacrity transferred himself to the first class. Erkel helped him. The third
bell rang.

"Well, Erkel." Hurriedly, and with a preoccupied air, Pyotr Stepanovitch held
out his hand from the window for the last time. "You see, I am sitting down to
cards with them."

"Why explain, Pyotr Stepanovitch? I understand, I understand it all!"

"Well, au revoir," Pyotr Stepanovitch turned away suddenly on his name being
called by the young man, who wanted to introduce him to his partners. And Erkel
saw nothing more of Pyotr Stepanovitch.

He returned home very sad. Not that he was alarmed at Pyotr Stepanovitch's
leaving them so suddenly, but... he had turned away from him so quickly when
that young swell had called to him and... he might have said something
different to him, not "Au revoir," or... or at least have pressed his hand more
warmly. That last was bitterest of all. Something else was beginning to gnaw in
his poor little heart, something which he could not understand himself yet,
something connected with the evening before.

