# PART I - CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY - V
[Metadata]: # {01.01.05}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01.05}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY
V
# V
She had herself designed the costume for him which he wore for the rest of his
life. It was elegant and characteristic; a long black frock-coat, buttoned
almost to the top, but stylishly cut; a soft hat (in summer a straw hat) with a
wide brim, a white batiste cravat with a full bow and hanging ends, a cane with
a silver knob; his hair flowed on to his shoulders. It was dark brown, and only
lately had begun to get a little grey. He was clean-shaven. He was said to have
been very handsome in his youth. And, to my mind, he was still an exceptionally
impressive figure even in old age. Besides, who can talk of old age at
fifty-three? From his special pose as a patriot, however, he did not try to
appear younger, but seemed rather to pride himself on the solidity of his age,
and, dressed as described, tall and thin with flowing hair, he looked almost
like a patriarch, or even more like the portrait of the poet Kukolnik, engraved
in the edition of his works published in 1830 or thereabouts. This resemblance
was especially striking when he sat in the garden in summertime, on a seat
under a bush of flowering lilac, with both hands propped on his cane and an
open book beside him, musing poetically over the setting sun. In regard to
books I may remark that he came in later years rather to avoid reading. But
that was only quite towards the end. The papers and magazines ordered in great
profusion by Varvara Petrovna he was continually reading. He never lost
interest in the successes of Russian literature either, though he always
maintained a dignified attitude with regard to them. He was at one time
engrossed in the study of our home and foreign politics, but he soon gave up
the undertaking with a gesture of despair. It sometimes happened that he would
take De Tocqueville with him into the garden while he had a Paul de Kock in his
pocket. But these are trivial matters.

I must observe in parenthesis about the portrait of Kukolnik; the engraving had
first come into the hands of Varvara Petrovna when she was a girl in a
high-class boarding-school in Moscow. She fell in love with the portrait at
once, after the habit of all girls at school who fall in love with anything
they come across, as well as with their teachers, especially the drawing and
writing masters. What is interesting in this, though, is not the
characteristics of girls but the fact that even at fifty Varvara Petrovna kept
the engraving among her most intimate and treasured possessions, so that
perhaps it was only on this account that she had designed for Stepan
Trofimovitch a costume somewhat like the poet's in the engraving. But that, of
course, is a trifling matter too.

For the first years or, more accurately, for the first half of the time he
spent with Varvara Petrovna, Stepan Trofimovitch was still planning a book and
every day seriously prepared to write it. But during the later period he must
have forgotten even what he had done. More and more frequently he used to say
to us:

"I seem to be ready for work, my materials are collected, yet the work doesn't
get done! Nothing is done!"

And he would bow his head dejectedly. No doubt this was calculated to increase
his prestige in our eyes as a martyr to science, but he himself was longing for
something else. "They have forgotten me! I'm no use to anyone!" broke from him
more than once. This intensified depression took special hold of him towards
the end of the fifties. Varvara Petrovna realised at last that it was a serious
matter. Besides, she could not endure the idea that her friend was forgotten
and useless. To distract him and at the same time to renew his fame she carried
him off to Moscow, where she had fashionable acquaintances in the literary and
scientific world; but it appeared that Moscow too was unsatisfactory.

It was a peculiar time; something new was beginning, quite unlike the
stagnation of the past, something very strange too, though it was felt
everywhere, even at Skvoreshniki. Rumours of all sorts reached us. The facts
were generally more or less well known, but it was evident that in addition to
the facts there were certain ideas accompanying them, and what's more, a great
number of them. And this was perplexing. It was impossible to estimate and find
out exactly what was the drift of these ideas. Varvara Petrovna was prompted by
the feminine composition of her character to a compelling desire to penetrate
the secret of them. She took to reading newspapers and magazines, prohibited
publications printed abroad and even the revolutionary manifestoes which were
just beginning to appear at the time (she was able to procure them all); but
this only set her head in a whirl. She fell to writing letters; she got few
answers, and they grew more incomprehensible as time went on. Stepan
Trofimovitch was solemnly called upon to explain "these ideas" to her once for
all, but she remained distinctly dissatisfied with his explanations.

Stepan Trofimovitch's view of the general movement was supercilious in the
extreme. In his eyes all it amounted to was that he was forgotten and of no
use. At last his name was mentioned, at first in periodicals published abroad
as that of an exiled martyr, and immediately afterwards in Petersburg as that
of a former star in a celebrated constellation. He was even for some reason
compared with Radishtchev. Then someone printed the statement that he was dead
and promised an obituary notice of him. Stepan Trofimovitch instantly perked up
and assumed an air of immense dignity. All his disdain for his contemporaries
evaporated and he began to cherish the dream of joining the movement and
showing his powers. Varvara Petrovna's faith in everything instantly revived
and she was thrown into a violent ferment. It was decided to go to Petersburg
without a moment's delay, to find out everything on the spot, to go into
everything personally, and, if possible, to throw themselves heart and soul
into the new movement. Among other things she announced that she was prepared
to found a magazine of her own, and henceforward to devote her whole life to
it. Seeing what it had come to, Stepan Trofimovitch became more condescending
than ever, and on the journey began to behave almost patronisingly to Varvara
Petrovna--which she at once laid up in her heart against him. She had, however,
another very important reason for the trip, which was to renew her connections
in higher spheres. It was necessary, as far as she could, to remind the world
of her existence, or at any rate to make an attempt to do so. The ostensible
object of the journey was to see her only son, who was just finishing his
studies at a Petersburg lyceum.

