# PART I - CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT - I
[Metadata]: # {01.05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {01.05.01.01}
VARVARA PETROVNA rang the bell and threw herself into an easy chair by the
window.

"Sit here, my dear." She motioned Marya Timofyevna to a seat in the middle of
the room, by a large round table. "Stepan Trofimovitch, what is the meaning of
this? See, see, look at this woman, what is the meaning of it?"

"I... I..." faltered Stepan Trofimovitch.

But a footman came in.

"A cup of coffee at once, we must have it as quickly as possible! Keep the
horses!"

_"Mais, chère et excellente amie, dans quelle inquiétude..."_ Stepan
Trofimovitch exclaimed in a dying voice.

"Ach! French! French! I can see at once that it's the highest society," cried
Marya Timofyevna, clapping her hands, ecstatically preparing herself to listen
to a conversation in French. Varvara Petrovna stared at her almost in dismay.

We all sat in silence, waiting to see how it would end. Shatov did not lift up
his head, and Stepan Trofimovitch was overwhelmed with confusion as though it
were all his fault; the perspiration stood out on his temples. I glanced at
Liza (she was sitting in the corner almost beside Shatov). Her eyes darted
keenly from Varvara Petrovna to the cripple and back again; her lips were drawn
into a smile, but not a pleasant one. Varvara Petrovna saw that smile.
Meanwhile Marya Timofyevna was absolutely transported. With evident enjoyment
and without a trace of embarrassment she stared at Varvara Petrovna's beautiful
drawing-room--the furniture, the carpets, the pictures on the walls, the
old-fashioned painted ceiling, the great bronze crucifix in the corner, the
china lamp, the albums, the objects on the table.

"And you're here, too, Shatushka!" she cried suddenly. "Only fancy, I saw you a
long time ago, but I thought it couldn't be you! How could you come here!" And
she laughed gaily.

"You know this woman?" said Varvara Petrovna, turning to him at once.

"I know her," muttered Shatov. He seemed about to move from his chair, but
remained sitting.

"What do you know of her? Make haste, please!"

"Oh, well..." he stammered with an incongruous smile. "You see for
yourself...."

"What do I see? Come now, say something!"

"She lives in the same house as I do... with her brother... an officer."

"Well?"

Shatov stammered again.

"It's not worth talking about..." he muttered, and relapsed into determined
silence. He positively flushed with determination.

"Of course one can expect nothing else from you," said Varvara Petrovna
indignantly. It was clear to her now that they all knew something and, at the
same time, that they were all scared, that they were evading her questions, and
anxious to keep something from her.

The footman came in and brought her, on a little silver tray, the cup of coffee
she had so specially ordered, but at a sign from her moved with it at once
towards Marya Timofyevna.

"You were very cold just now, my dear; make haste and drink it and get warm."

_"Merci."_

Marya Timofyevna took the cup and at once went off into a giggle at having said
_merci_ to the footman. But meeting Varvara Petrovna's reproving eyes, she was
overcome with shyness and put the cup on the table.

"Auntie, surely you're not angry?" she faltered with a sort of flippant
playfulness.

"Wh-a-a-t?" Varvara Petrovna started, and drew herself up in her chair. "I'm
not your aunt. What are you thinking of?"

Marya Timofyevna, not expecting such an angry outburst, began trembling all
over in little convulsive shudders, as though she were in a fit, and sank back
in her chair.

"I... I... thought that was the proper way," she faltered, gazing open-eyed at
Varvara Petrovna. "Liza called you that."

"What Liza?"

"Why, this young lady here," said Marya Timofyevna, pointing with her finger.

"So she's Liza already?"

"You called her that yourself just now," said Marya Timofyevna growing a little
bolder. "And I dreamed of a beauty like that," she added, laughing, as it were
accidentally.

Varvara Petrovna reflected, and grew calmer, she even smiled faintly at Marya
Timofyevna's last words; the latter, catching her smile, got up from her chair,
and limping, went timidly towards her.

"Take it. I forgot to give it back. Don't be angry with my rudeness."

She took from her shoulders the black shawl that Varvara Petrovna had wrapped
round her.

"Put it on again at once, and you can keep it always. Go and sit down, drink
your coffee, and please don't be afraid of me, my dear, don't worry yourself. I
am beginning to understand you."

_"Chère amie..."_ Stepan Trofimovitch ventured again.

"Ach, Stepan Trofimovitch, it's bewildering enough without you. You might at
least spare me.... Please ring that bell there, near you, to the maid's room."

A silence followed. Her eyes strayed irritably and suspiciously over all our
faces. Agasha, her favourite maid, came in.

"Bring me my check shawl, the one I bought in Geneva. What's Darya Pavlovna
doing?"

"She's not very well, madam."

"Go and ask her to come here. Say that I want her particularly, even if she's
not well."

At that instant there was again, as before, an unusual noise of steps and
voices in the next room, and suddenly Praskovya Ivanovna, panting and
"distracted," appeared in the doorway. She was leaning on the arm of Mavriky
Nikolaevitch.

"Ach, heavens, I could scarcely drag myself here. Liza, you mad girl, how you
treat your mother!" she squeaked, concentrating in that squeak, as weak and
irritable people are wont to do, all her accumulated irritability. "Varvara
Petrovna, I've come for my daughter!"

Varvara Petrovna looked at her from under her brows, half rose to meet her, and
scarcely concealing her vexation brought out: "Good morning, Praskovya
Ivanovna, please be seated, I knew you would come!"

