# PART III - CHAPTER II. THE END OF THE FETE - IV
[Metadata]: # {03.02.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02.04}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# IV
[TreeTag]: # {03.02.04.01}
The fire frightened the inhabitants of the riverside just because it was
evidently a case of arson. It was curious that at the first cry of "fire"
another cry was raised that the Shpigulin men had done it. It is now well known
that three Shpigulin men really did have a share in setting fire to the town,
but that was all; all the other factory hands were completely acquitted, not
only officially but also by public opinion. Besides those three rascals (of
whom one has been caught and confessed and the other two have so far escaped),
Fedka the convict undoubtedly had a hand in the arson. That is all that is
known for certain about the fire till now; but when it comes to conjectures
it's a very different matter. What had led these three rascals to do it? Had
they been instigated by anyone? It is very difficult to answer all these
questions even now.

Owing to the strong wind, the fact that the houses at the riverside were almost
all wooden, and that they had been set fire to in three places, the fire spread
quickly and enveloped the whole quarter with extraordinary rapidity. (The fire
burnt, however, only at two ends; at the third spot it was extinguished almost
as soon as it began to burn--of which later.) But the Petersburg and Moscow
papers exaggerated our calamity. Not more than a quarter, roughly speaking, of
the riverside district was burnt down; possibly less indeed. Our fire brigade,
though it was hardly adequate to the size and population of the town, worked
with great promptitude and devotion. But it would not have been of much avail,
even with the zealous co-operation of the inhabitants, if the wind had not
suddenly dropped towards morning. When an hour after our flight from the ball I
made my way to the riverside, the fire was at its height. A whole street
parallel with the river was in flames. It was as light as day. I won't describe
the fire; every one in Russia knows what it looks like. The bustle and crush
was immense in the lanes adjoining the burning street. The inhabitants, fully
expecting the fire to reach their houses, were hauling out their belongings,
but had not yet left their dwellings, and were waiting meanwhile sitting on
their boxes and feather beds under their windows. Part of the male population
were hard at work ruthlessly chopping down fences and even whole huts which
were near the fire and on the windward side. None were crying except the
children, who had been waked out of their sleep, though the women who had
dragged out their chattels were lamenting in sing-song voices. Those who had
not finished their task were still silent, busily carrying out their goods.
Sparks and embers were carried a long way in all directions. People put them
out as best they could. Some helped to put the fire out while others stood
about, admiring it. A great fire at night always has a thrilling and
exhilarating effect. This is what explains the attraction of fireworks. But in
that case the artistic regularity with which the fire is presented and the
complete lack of danger give an impression of lightness and playfulness like
the effect of a glass of champagne. A real conflagration is a very different
matter. Then the horror and a certain sense of personal danger, together with
the exhilarating effect of a fire at night, produce on the spectator (though of
course not in the householder whose goods are being burnt) a certain concussion
of the brain and, as it were, a challenge to those destructive instincts which,
alas, lie hidden in every heart, even that of the mildest and most domestic
little clerk.... This sinister sensation is almost always fascinating. "I
really don't know whether one can look at a fire without a certain pleasure."
This is word for word what Stepan Trofimovitch said to me one night on
returning home after he had happened to witness a fire and was still under the
influence of the spectacle. Of course, the very man who enjoys the spectacle
will rush into the fire himself to save a child or an old woman; but that is
altogether a different matter.

Following in the wake of the crowd of sightseers, I succeeded, without asking
questions, in reaching the chief centre of danger, where at last I saw Lembke,
whom I was seeking at Yulia Mihailovna's request. His position was strange and
extraordinary. He was standing on the ruins of a fence. Thirty paces to the
left of him rose the black skeleton of a two-storied house which had almost
burnt out. It had holes instead of windows at each story, its roof had fallen
in, and the flames were still here and there creeping among the charred beams.
At the farther end of the courtyard, twenty paces away, the lodge, also a
two-storied building, was beginning to burn, and the firemen were doing their
utmost to save it. On the right the firemen and the people were trying to save
a rather large wooden building which was not actually burning, though it had
caught fire several times and was inevitably bound to be burnt in the end.
Lembke stood facing the lodge, shouting and gesticulating. He was giving orders
which no one attempted to carry out. It seemed to me that every one had given
him up as hopeless and left him. Anyway, though every one in the vast crowd of
all classes, among whom there were gentlemen, and even the cathedral priest,
was listening to him with curiosity and wonder, no one spoke to him or tried to
get him away. Lembke, with a pale face and glittering eyes, was uttering the
most amazing things. To complete the picture, he had lost his hat and was
bareheaded.

"It's all incendiarism! It's nihilism! If anything is burning, it's nihilism!"
I heard almost with horror; and though there was nothing to be surprised at,
yet actual madness, when one sees it, always gives one a shock.

"Your Excellency," said a policeman, coming up to him, "what if you were to try
the repose of home?... It's dangerous for your Excellency even to stand here."

This policeman, as I heard afterwards, had been told off by the chief of police
to watch over Andrey Antonovitch, to do his utmost to get him home, and in case
of danger even to use force--a task evidently beyond the man's power.

"They will wipe away the tears of the people whose houses have been burnt, but
they will burn down the town. It's all the work of four scoundrels, four and a
half! Arrest the scoundrel! He worms himself into the honour of families. They
made use of the governesses to burn down the houses. It's vile, vile! Aie,
what's he about?" he shouted, suddenly noticing a fireman at the top of the
burning lodge, under whom the roof had almost burnt away and round whom the
flames were beginning to flare up. "Pull him down! Pull him down! He will fall,
he will catch fire, put him out!... What is he doing there?"

"He is putting the fire out, your Excellency."

"Not likely. The fire is in the minds of men and not in the roofs of houses.
Pull him down and give it up! Better give it up, much better! Let it put itself
out. Aie, who is crying now? An old woman! It's an old woman shouting. Why have
they forgotten the old woman?"

There actually was an old woman crying on the ground floor of the burning
lodge. She was an old creature of eighty, a relation of the shopkeeper who
owned the house. But she had not been forgotten; she had gone back to the
burning house while it was still possible, with the insane idea of rescuing her
feather bed from a corner room which was still untouched. Choking with the
smoke and screaming with the heat, for the room was on fire by the time she
reached it, she was still trying with her decrepit hands to squeeze her feather
bed through a broken window pane. Lembke rushed to her assistance. Every one
saw him run up to the window, catch hold of one corner of the feather bed and
try with all his might to pull it out. As ill luck would have it, a board fell
at that moment from the roof and hit the unhappy governor. It did not kill him,
it merely grazed him on the neck as it fell, but Andrey Antonovitch's career
was over, among us at least; the blow knocked him off his feet and he sank on
the ground unconscious.

The day dawned at last, gloomy and sullen. The fire was abating; the wind was
followed by a sudden calm, and then a fine drizzling rain fell. I was by that
time in another part, some distance from where Lembke had fallen, and here I
overheard very strange conversations in the crowd. A strange fact had come to
light. On the very outskirts of the quarter, on a piece of waste land beyond
the kitchen gardens, not less than fifty paces from any other buildings, there
stood a little wooden house which had only lately been built, and this solitary
house had been on fire at the very beginning, almost before any other. Even had
it burnt down, it was so far from other houses that no other building in the
town could have caught fire from it, and, vice versa, if the whole riverside
had been burnt to the ground, that house might have remained intact, whatever
the wind had been. It followed that it had caught fire separately and
independently and therefore not accidentally. But the chief point was that it
was not burnt to the ground, and at daybreak strange things were discovered
within it. The owner of this new house, who lived in the neighbourhood, rushed
up as soon as he saw it in flames and with the help of his neighbours pulled
apart a pile of faggots which had been heaped up by the side wall and set fire
to. In this way he saved the house. But there were lodgers in the house--the
captain, who was well known in the town, his sister, and their elderly servant,
and these three persons--the captain, his sister, and their servant--had been
murdered and apparently robbed in the night. (It was here that the chief of
police had gone while Lembke was rescuing the feather bed.)

By morning the news had spread and an immense crowd of all classes, even the
riverside people who had been burnt out had flocked to the waste land where the
new house stood. It was difficult to get there, so dense was the crowd. I was
told at once that the captain had been found lying dressed on the bench with
his throat cut, and that he must have been dead drunk when he was killed, so
that he had felt nothing, and he had "bled like a bull"; that his sister Marya
Timofeyevna had been "stabbed all over" with a knife and she was lying on the
floor in the doorway, so that probably she had been awake and had fought and
struggled with the murderer. The servant, who had also probably been awake, had
her skull broken. The owner of the house said that the captain had come to see
him the morning before, and that in his drunken bragging he had shown him a lot
of money, as much as two hundred roubles. The captain's shabby old green
pocket-book was found empty on the floor, but Marya Timofeyevna's box had not
been touched, and the silver setting of the ikon had not been removed either;
the captain's clothes, too, had not been disturbed. It was evident that the
thief had been in a hurry and was a man familiar with the captain's
circumstances, who had come only for money and knew where it was kept. If the
owner of the house had not run up at that moment the burning faggot stack would
certainly have set fire to the house and "it would have been difficult to find
out from the charred corpses how they had died."

So the story was told. One other fact was added: that the person who had taken
this house for the Lebyadkins was no other than Mr. Stavrogin, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, the son of Varvara Petrovna. He had come himself to take it
and had had much ado to persuade the owner to let it, as the latter had
intended to use it as a tavern; but Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was ready to give
any rent he asked and had paid for six months in advance.

"The fire wasn't an accident," I heard said in the crowd.

But the majority said nothing. People's faces were sullen, but I did not see
signs of much indignation. People persisted, however, in gossiping about
Stavrogin, saying that the murdered woman was his wife; that on the previous
day he had "dishonourably" abducted a young lady belonging to the best family
in the place, the daughter of Madame Drozdov, and that a complaint was to be
lodged against him in Petersburg; and that his wife had been murdered evidently
that he might marry the young lady. Skvoreshniki was not more than a mile and a
half away, and I remember I wondered whether I should not let them know the
position of affairs. I did not notice, however, that there was anyone egging
the crowd on and I don't want to accuse people falsely, though I did see and
recognised at once in the crowd at the fire two or three of the rowdy lot I had
seen in the refreshment-room. I particularly remember one thin, tall fellow, a
cabinet-maker, as I found out later, with an emaciated face and a curly head,
black as though grimed with soot. He was not drunk, but in contrast to the
gloomy passivity of the crowd seemed beside himself with excitement. He kept
addressing the people, though I don't remember his words; nothing coherent that
he said was longer than "I say, lads, what do you say to this? Are things to go
on like this?" and so saying he waved his arms.

