# PART II - CHAPTER X. FILIBUSTERS. A FATAL MORNING - I
[Metadata]: # {02.10.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.10.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER X. FILIBUSTERS. A FATAL MORNING
I
# I
The adventure that befell us on the way was also a surprising one. But I must
tell the story in due order. An hour before Stepan Trofimovitch and I came out
into the street, a crowd of people, the hands from Shpigulins' factory, seventy
or more in number, had been marching through the town, and had been an object
of curiosity to many spectators. They walked intentionally in good order and
almost in silence. Afterwards it was asserted that these seventy had been
elected out of the whole number of factory hands, amounting to about nine
hundred, to go to the governor and to try and get from him, in the absence of
their employer, a just settlement of their grievances against the manager, who,
in closing the factory and dismissing the workmen, had cheated them all in an
impudent way--a fact which has since been proved conclusively. Some people
still deny that there was any election of delegates, maintaining that seventy
was too large a number to elect, and that the crowd simply consisted of those
who had been most unfairly treated, and that they only came to ask for help in
their own case, so that the general "mutiny" of the factory workers, about
which there was such an uproar later on, had never existed at all. Others
fiercely maintained that these seventy men were not simple strikers but
revolutionists, that is, not merely that they were the most turbulent, but that
they must have been worked upon by seditious manifestoes. The fact is, it is
still uncertain whether there had been any outside influence or incitement at
work or not. My private opinion is that the workmen had not read the seditious
manifestoes at all, and if they had read them, would not have understood one
word, for one reason because the authors of such literature write very
obscurely in spite of the boldness of their style. But as the workmen really
were in a difficult plight and the police to whom they appealed would not enter
into their grievances, what could be more natural than their idea of going in a
body to "the general himself" if possible, with the petition at their head,
forming up in an orderly way before his door, and as soon as he showed himself,
all falling on their knees and crying out to him as to providence itself? To my
mind there is no need to see in this a mutiny or even a deputation, for it's a
traditional, historical mode of action; the Russian people have always loved to
parley with "the general himself" for the mere satisfaction of doing so,
regardless of how the conversation may end.

And so I am quite convinced that, even though Pyotr Stepanovitch, Liputin, and
perhaps some others--perhaps even Fedka too--had been flitting about among the
workpeople talking to them (and there is fairly good evidence of this), they
had only approached two, three, five at the most, trying to sound them, and
nothing had come of their conversation. As for the mutiny they advocated, if
the factory-workers did understand anything of their propaganda, they would
have left off listening to it at once as to something stupid that had nothing
to do with them. Fedka was a different matter: he had more success, I believe,
than Pyotr Stepanovitch. Two workmen are now known for a fact to have assisted
Fedka in causing the fire in the town which occurred three days afterwards, and
a month later three men who had worked in the factory were arrested for robbery
and arson in the province. But if in these cases Fedka did lure them to direct
and immediate action, he could only have succeeded with these five, for we
heard of nothing of the sort being done by others.

Be that as it may, the whole crowd of workpeople had at last reached the open
space in front of the governor's house and were drawn up there in silence and
good order. Then, gaping open-mouthed at the front door, they waited. I am told
that as soon as they halted they took off their caps, that is, a good half-hour
before the appearance of the governor, who, as ill-luck would have it, was not
at home at the moment. The police made their appearance at once, at first
individual policemen and then as large a contingent of them as could be
gathered together; they began, of course, by being menacing, ordering them to
break up. But the workmen remained obstinately, like a flock of sheep at a
fence, and replied laconically that they had come to see "the general himself";
it was evident that they were firmly determined. The unnatural shouting of the
police ceased, and was quickly succeeded by deliberations, mysterious whispered
instructions, and stern, fussy perplexity, which wrinkled the brows of the
police officers. The head of the police preferred to await the arrival of the
"governor himself." It was not true that he galloped to the spot with three
horses at full speed, and began hitting out right and left before he alighted
from his carriage. It's true that he used to dash about and was fond of dashing
about at full speed in a carriage with a yellow back, and while his
trace-horses, who were so trained to carry their heads that they looked
"positively perverted," galloped more and more frantically, rousing the
enthusiasm of all the shopkeepers in the bazaar, he would rise up in the
carriage, stand erect, holding on by a strap which had been fixed on purpose at
the side, and with his right arm extended into space like a figure on a
monument, survey the town majestically. But in the present case he did not use
his fists, and though as he got out of the carriage he could not refrain from a
forcible expression, this was simply done to keep up his popularity. There is a
still more absurd story that soldiers were brought up with bayonets, and that a
telegram was sent for artillery and Cossacks; those are legends which are not
believed now even by those who invented them. It's an absurd story, too, that
barrels of water were brought from the fire brigade, and that people were
drenched with water from them. The simple fact is that Ilya Ilyitch shouted in
his heat that he wouldn't let one of them come dry out of the water; probably
this was the foundation of the barrel legend which got into the columns of the
Petersburg and Moscow newspapers. Probably the most accurate version was that
at first all the available police formed a cordon round the crowd, and a
messenger was sent for Lembke, a police superintendent, who dashed off in the
carriage belonging to the head of the police on the way to Skvoreshniki,
knowing that Lembke had gone there in his carriage half an hour before.

But I must confess that I am still unable to answer the question how they could
at first sight, from the first moment, have transformed an insignificant, that
is to say an ordinary, crowd of petitioners, even though there were several of
them, into a rebellion which threatened to shake the foundations of the state.
Why did Lembke himself rush at that idea when he arrived twenty minutes after
the messenger? I imagine (but again it's only my private opinion) that it was
to the interest of Ilya Ilyitch, who was a crony of the factory manager's, to
represent the crowd in this light to Lembke, in order to prevent him from going
into the case; and Lembke himself had put the idea into his head. In the course
of the last two days, he had had two unusual and mysterious conversations with
him. It is true they were exceedingly obscure, but Ilya Ilyitch was able to
gather from them that the governor had thoroughly made up his mind that there
were political manifestoes, and that Shpigulins' factory hands were being
incited to a Socialist rising, and that he was so persuaded of it that he would
perhaps have regretted it if the story had turned out to be nonsense. "He wants
to get distinction in Petersburg," our wily Ilya Ilyitch thought to himself as
he left Von Lembke; "well, that just suits me."

But I am convinced that poor Andrey Antonovitch would not have desired a
rebellion even for the sake of distinguishing himself. He was a most
conscientious official, who had lived in a state of innocence up to the time of
his marriage. And was it his fault that, instead of an innocent allowance of
wood from the government and an equally innocent Minnchen, a princess of forty
summers had raised him to her level? I know almost for certain that the
unmistakable symptoms of the mental condition which brought poor Andrey
Antonovitch to a well-known establishment in Switzerland, where, I am told, he
is now regaining his energies, were first apparent on that fatal morning. But
once we admit that unmistakable signs of something were visible that morning,
it may well be allowed that similar symptoms may have been evident the day
before, though not so clearly. I happen to know from the most private sources
(well, you may assume that Yulia Mihailovna later on, not in triumph but
_almost_ in remorse--for a woman is incapable of _complete_ remorse--revealed
part of it to me herself) that Andrey Antonovitch had gone into his wife's room
in the middle of the previous night, past two o'clock in the morning, had waked
her up, and had insisted on her listening to his "ultimatum." He demanded it so
insistently that she was obliged to get up from her bed in indignation and
curl-papers, and, sitting down on a couch, she had to listen, though with
sarcastic disdain. Only then she grasped for the first time how far gone her
Andrey Antonovitch was, and was secretly horrified. She ought to have thought
what she was about and have been softened, but she concealed her horror and was
more obstinate than ever. Like every wife she had her own method of treating
Andrey Antonovitch, which she had tried more than once already and with it
driven him to frenzy. Yulia Mihailovna's method was that of contemptuous
silence, for one hour, two, a whole day and almost for three days and
nights--silence whatever happened, whatever he said, whatever he did, even if
he had clambered up to throw himself out of a three-story window--a method
unendurable for a sensitive man! Whether Yulia Mihailovna meant to punish her
husband for his blunders of the last few days and the jealous envy he, as the
chief authority in the town, felt for her administrative abilities; whether she
was indignant at his criticism of her behaviour with the young people and local
society generally, and lack of comprehension of her subtle and far-sighted
political aims; or was angry with his stupid and senseless jealousy of Pyotr
Stepanovitch--however that may have been, she made up her mind not to be
softened even now, in spite of its being three o'clock at night, and though
Andrey Antonovitch was in a state of emotion such as she had never seen him in
before.

Pacing up and down in all directions over the rugs of her boudoir, beside
himself, he poured out everything, everything, quite disconnectedly, it's true,
but everything that had been rankling in his heart, for--"it was outrageous."
He began by saying that he was a laughing-stock to every one and "was being led
by the nose."

"Curse the expression," he squealed, at once catching her smile, "let it stand,
it's true.... No, madam, the time has come; let me tell you it's not a time for
laughter and feminine arts now. We are not in the boudoir of a mincing lady,
but like two abstract creatures in a balloon who have met to speak the truth."
(He was no doubt confused and could not find the right words for his ideas,
however just they were.) "It is you, madam, you who have destroyed my happy
past. I took up this post simply for your sake, for the sake of your
ambition.... You smile sarcastically? Don't triumph, don't be in a hurry. Let
me tell you, madam, let me tell you that I should have been equal to this
position, and not only this position but a dozen positions like it, for I have
abilities; but with you, madam, with you--it's impossible, for with you here I
have no abilities. There cannot be two centres, and you have created two--one
of mine and one in your boudoir--two centres of power, madam, but I won't allow
it, I won't allow it! In the service, as in marriage, there must be one centre,
two are impossible.... How have you repaid me?" he went on. "Our marriage has
been nothing but your proving to me all the time, every hour, that I am a
nonentity, a fool, and even a rascal, and I have been all the time, every hour,
forced in a degrading way to prove to you that I am not a nonentity, not a fool
at all, and that I impress every one with my honourable character. Isn't that
degrading for both sides?"

At this point he began rapidly stamping with both feet on the carpet, so that
Yulia Mihailovna was obliged to get up with stern dignity. He subsided quickly,
but passed to being pathetic and began sobbing (yes, sobbing!), beating himself
on the breast almost for five minutes, getting more and more frantic at Yulia
Mihailovna's profound silence. At last he made a fatal blunder, and let slip
that he was jealous of Pyotr Stepanovitch. Realising that he had made an utter
fool of himself, he became savagely furious, and shouted that he "would not
allow them to deny God" and that he would "send her _salon_ of irresponsible
infidels packing," that the governor of a province was bound to believe in God
"and so his wife was too," that he wouldn't put up with these young men; that
"you, madam, for the sake of your own dignity, ought to have thought of your
husband and to have stood up for his intelligence even if he were a man of poor
abilities (and I'm by no means a man of poor abilities!), and yet it's your
doing that every one here despises me, it was you put them all up to it!" He
shouted that he would annihilate the woman question, that he would eradicate
every trace of it, that to-morrow he would forbid and break up their silly fête
for the benefit of the governesses (damn them!), that the first governess he
came across to-morrow morning he would drive out of the province "with a
Cossack! I'll make a point of it!" he shrieked. "Do you know," he screamed, "do
you know that your rascals are inciting men at the factory, and that I know it?
Let me tell you, I know the names of four of these rascals and that I am going
out of my mind, hopelessly, hopelessly!..."

But at this point Yulia Mihailovna suddenly broke her silence and sternly
announced that she had long been aware of these criminal designs, and that it
was all foolishness, and that he had taken it too seriously, and that as for
these mischievous fellows, she knew not only those four but all of them (it was
a lie); but that she had not the faintest intention of going out of her mind on
account of it, but, on the contrary, had all the more confidence in her
intelligence and hoped to bring it all to a harmonious conclusion: to encourage
the young people, to bring them to reason, to show them suddenly and
unexpectedly that their designs were known, and then to point out to them new
aims for rational and more noble activity.

Oh, how can I describe the effect of this on Andrey Antonovitch! Hearing that
Pyotr Stepanovitch had duped him again and had made a fool of him so coarsely,
that he had told her much more than he had told him, and sooner than him, and
that perhaps Pyotr Stepanovitch was the chief instigator of all these criminal
designs--he flew into a frenzy. "Senseless but malignant woman," he cried,
snapping his bonds at one blow, "let me tell you, I shall arrest your worthless
lover at once, I shall put him in fetters and send him to the fortress, or--I
shall jump out of a window before your eyes this minute!"

Yulia Mihailovna, turning green with anger, greeted this tirade at once with a
burst of prolonged, ringing laughter, going off into peals such as one hears at
the French theatre when a Parisian actress, imported for a fee of a hundred
thousand to play a coquette, laughs in her husband's face for daring to be
jealous of her.

Von Lembke rushed to the window, but suddenly stopped as though rooted to the
spot, folded his arms across his chest, and, white as a corpse, looked with a
sinister gaze at the laughing lady. "Do you know, Yulia, do you know," he said
in a gasping and suppliant voice, "do you know that even I can do something?"
But at the renewed and even louder laughter that followed his last words he
clenched his teeth, groaned, and suddenly rushed, not towards the window, but
at his spouse, with his fist raised! He did not bring it down--no, I repeat
again and again, no; but it was the last straw. He ran to his own room, not
knowing what he was doing, flung himself, dressed as he was, face downwards on
his bed, wrapped himself convulsively, head and all, in the sheet, and lay so
for two hours--incapable of sleep, incapable of thought, with a load on his
heart and blank, immovable despair in his soul. Now and then he shivered all
over with an agonising, feverish tremor. Disconnected and irrelevant things
kept coming into his mind: at one minute he thought of the old clock which used
to hang on his wall fifteen years ago in Petersburg and had lost the
minute-hand; at another of the cheerful clerk, Millebois, and how they had once
caught a sparrow together in Alexandrovsky Park and had laughed so that they
could be heard all over the park, remembering that one of them was already a
college assessor. I imagine that about seven in the morning he must have fallen
asleep without being aware of it himself, and must have slept with enjoyment,
with agreeable dreams.

Waking about ten o'clock, he jumped wildly out of bed remembered everything at
once, and slapped himself on the head; he refused his breakfast, and would see
neither Blum nor the chief of the police nor the clerk who came to remind him
that he was expected to preside over a meeting that morning; he would listen to
nothing, and did not want to understand. He ran like one possessed to Yulia
Mihailovna's part of the house. There Sofya Antropovna, an old lady of good
family who had lived for years with Yulia Mihailovna, explained to him that his
wife had set off at ten o'clock that morning with a large company in three
carriages to Varvara Petrovna Stavrogin's, to Skvoreshniki, to look over the
place with a view to the second fête which was planned for a fortnight later,
and that the visit to-day had been arranged with Varvara Petrovna three days
before. Overwhelmed with this news, Andrey Antonovitch returned to his study
and impulsively ordered the horses. He could hardly wait for them to be got
ready. His soul was hungering for Yulia Mihailovna--to look at her, to be near
her for five minutes; perhaps she would glance at him, notice him, would smile
as before, forgive him... "O-oh! Aren't the horses ready?" Mechanically he
opened a thick book lying on the table. (He sometimes used to try his fortune
in this way with a book, opening it at random and reading the three lines at
the top of the right-hand page.) What turned up was: _"Tout est pour le mieux
dans le meilleur des mondes possibles."_--Voltaire, _Candide._ He uttered an
ejaculation of contempt and ran to get into the carriage. "Skvoreshniki!"

The coachman said afterwards that his master urged him on all the way, but as
soon as they were getting near the mansion he suddenly told him to turn and
drive back to the town, bidding him "Drive fast; please drive fast!" Before
they reached the town wall "master told me to stop again, got out of the
carriage, and went across the road into the field; I thought he felt ill but he
stopped and began looking at the flowers, and so he stood for a time. It was
strange, really; I began to feel quite uneasy." This was the coachman's
testimony. I remember the weather that morning: it was a cold, clear, but windy
September day; before Andrey Antonovitch stretched a forbidding landscape of
bare fields from which the crop had long been harvested; there were a few dying
yellow flowers, pitiful relics blown about by the howling wind. Did he want to
compare himself and his fate with those wretched flowers battered by the autumn
and the frost? I don't think so; in fact I feel sure it was not so, and that he
realised nothing about the flowers in spite of the evidence of the coachman and
of the police superintendent, who drove up at that moment and asserted
afterwards that he found the governor with a bunch of yellow flowers in his
hand. This police superintendent, Flibusterov by name, was an ardent champion
of authority who had only recently come to our town but had already
distinguished himself and become famous by his inordinate zeal, by a certain
vehemence in the execution of his duties, and his inveterate inebriety. Jumping
out of the carriage, and not the least disconcerted at the sight of what the
governor was doing, he blurted out all in one breath, with a frantic
expression, yet with an air of conviction, that "There's an upset in the town."

"Eh? What?" said Andrey Antonovitch, turning to him with a stern face, but
without a trace of surprise or any recollection of his carriage and his
coachman, as though he had been in his own study.

"Police-superintendent Flibusterov, your Excellency. There's a riot in the
town."

"Filibusters?" Andrey Antonovitch said thoughtfully.

"Just so, your Excellency. The Shpigulin men are making a riot."

"The Shpigulin men!..."

The name "Shpigulin" seemed to remind him of something. He started and put his
finger to his forehead: "The Shpigulin men!" In silence, and still plunged in
thought, he walked without haste to the carriage, took his seat, and told the
coachman to drive to the town. The police-superintendent followed in the
droshky.

I imagine that he had vague impressions of many interesting things of all sorts
on the way, but I doubt whether he had any definite idea or any settled
intention as he drove into the open space in front of his house. But no sooner
did he see the resolute and orderly ranks of "the rioters," the cordon of
police, the helpless (and perhaps purposely helpless) chief of police, and the
general expectation of which he was the object, than all the blood rushed to
his heart. With a pale face he stepped out of his carriage.

"Caps off!" he said breathlessly and hardly audibly. "On your knees!" he
squealed, to the surprise of every one, to his own surprise too, and perhaps
the very unexpectedness of the position was the explanation of what followed.
Can a sledge on a switchback at carnival stop short as it flies down the hill?
What made it worse, Andrey Antonovitch had been all his life serene in
character, and never shouted or stamped at anyone; and such people are always
the most dangerous if it once happens that something sets their sledge sliding
downhill. Everything was whirling before his eyes.

"Filibusters!" he yelled still more shrilly and absurdly, and his voice broke.
He stood, not knowing what he was going to do, but knowing and feeling in his
whole being that he certainly would do something directly.

"Lord!" was heard from the crowd. A lad began crossing himself; three or four
men actually did try to kneel down, but the whole mass moved three steps
forward, and suddenly all began talking at once: "Your Excellency... we were
hired for a term... the manager... you mustn't say," and so on and so on. It
was impossible to distinguish anything.

Alas! Andrey Antonovitch could distinguish nothing: the flowers were still in
his hands. The riot was as real to him as the prison carts were to Stepan
Trofimovitch. And flitting to and fro in the crowd of "rioters" who gazed
open-eyed at him, he seemed to see Pyotr Stepanovitch, who had egged them
on--Pyotr Stepanovitch, whom he hated and whose image had never left him since
yesterday.

"Rods!" he cried even more unexpectedly. A dead silence followed.

From the facts I have learnt and those I have conjectured, this must have been
what happened at the beginning; but I have no such exact information for what
followed, nor can I conjecture it so easily. There are some facts, however.

In the first place, rods were brought on the scene with strange rapidity; they
had evidently been got ready beforehand in expectation by the intelligent chief
of the police. Not more than two, or at most three, were actually flogged,
however; that fact I wish to lay stress on. It's an absolute fabrication to say
that the whole crowd of rioters, or at least half of them, were punished. It is
a nonsensical story, too, that a poor but respectable lady was caught as she
passed by and promptly thrashed; yet I read myself an account of this incident
afterwards among the provincial items of a Petersburg newspaper. Many people in
the town talked of an old woman called Avdotya Petrovna Tarapygin who lived in
the almshouse by the cemetery. She was said, on her way home from visiting a
friend, to have forced her way into the crowd of spectators through natural
curiosity. Seeing what was going on, she cried out, "What a shame!" and spat on
the ground. For this it was said she had been seized and flogged too. This
story not only appeared in print, but in our excitement we positively got up a
subscription for her benefit. I subscribed twenty kopecks myself. And would you
believe it? It appears now that there was no old woman called Tarapygin living
in the almshouse at all! I went to inquire at the almshouse by the cemetery
myself; they had never heard of anyone called Tarapygin there, and, what's
more, they were quite offended when I told them the story that was going round.
I mention this fabulous Avdotya Petrovna because what happened to her (if she
really had existed) very nearly happened to Stepan Trofimovitch. Possibly,
indeed, his adventure may have been at the bottom of the ridiculous tale about
the old woman, that is, as the gossip went on growing he was transformed into
this old dame.

What I find most difficult to understand is how he came to slip away from me as
soon as he got into the square. As I had a misgiving of something very
unpleasant, I wanted to take him round the square straight to the entrance to
the governor's, but my own curiosity was roused, and I stopped only for one
minute to question the first person I came across, and suddenly I looked round
and found Stepan Trofimovitch no longer at my side. Instinctively I darted off
to look for him in the most dangerous place; something made me feel that his
sledge, too, was flying downhill. And I did, as a fact, find him in the very
centre of things. I remember I seized him by the arm; but he looked quietly and
proudly at me with an air of immense authority.

_"Cher,"_ he pronounced in a voice which quivered on a breaking note, "if they
are dealing with people so unceremoniously before us, in an open square, what
is to be expected from that man, for instance... if he happens to act on his
own authority?"

And shaking with indignation and with an intense desire to defy them, he
pointed a menacing, accusing finger at Flibusterov, who was gazing at us
open-eyed two paces away.

"That man!" cried the latter, blind with rage. "What man? And who are you?" He
stepped up to him, clenching his fist. "Who are you?" he roared ferociously,
hysterically, and desperately. (I must mention that he knew Stepan Trofimovitch
perfectly well by sight.) Another moment and he would have certainly seized him
by the collar; but luckily, hearing him shout, Lembke turned his head. He gazed
intensely but with perplexity at Stepan Trofimovitch, seeming to consider
something, and suddenly he shook his hand impatiently. Flibusterov was checked.
I drew Stepan Trofimovitch out of the crowd, though perhaps he may have wished
to retreat himself.

"Home, home," I insisted; "it was certainly thanks to Lembke that we were not
beaten."

"Go, my friend; I am to blame for exposing you to this. You have a future and a
career of a sort before you, while I--_mon heure est sonnée._"

He resolutely mounted the governor's steps. The hall-porter knew me; I said
that we both wanted to see Yulia Mihailovna.

We sat down in the waiting-room and waited. I was unwilling to leave my friend,
but I thought it unnecessary to say anything more to him. He had the air of a
man who had consecrated himself to certain death for the sake of his country.
We sat down, not side by side, but in different corners--I nearer to the
entrance, he at some distance facing me, with his head bent in thought, leaning
lightly on his stick. He held his wide-brimmed hat in his left hand. We sat
like that for ten minutes.

