# PART III - CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART - IV
[Metadata]: # {03.01.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01.04}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART
IV
# IV
I ran out to him behind the scenes once more, and had time to warn him
excitedly that in my opinion the game was up, that he had better not appear at
all, but had better go home at once on the excuse of his usual ailment, for
instance, and I would take off my badge and come with him. At that instant he
was on his way to the platform; he stopped suddenly, and haughtily looking me
up and down he pronounced solemnly:

"What grounds have you, sir, for thinking me capable of such baseness?"

I drew back. I was as sure as twice two make four that he would not get off
without a catastrophe. Meanwhile, as I stood utterly dejected, I saw moving
before me again the figure of the professor, whose turn it was to appear after
Stepan Trofimovitch, and who kept lifting up his fist and bringing it down
again with a swing. He kept walking up and down, absorbed in himself and
muttering something to himself with a diabolical but triumphant smile. I
somehow almost unintentionally went up to him. I don't know what induced me to
meddle again. "Do you know," I said, "judging from many examples, if a lecturer
keeps an audience for more than twenty minutes it won't go on listening. No
celebrity is able to hold his own for half an hour."

He stopped short and seemed almost quivering with resentment. Infinite disdain
was expressed in his countenance.

"Don't trouble yourself," he muttered contemptuously and walked on. At that
moment Stepan Trofimovitch's voice rang out in the hall.

"Oh, hang you all," I thought, and ran to the hall.

Stepan Trofimovitch took his seat in the lecturer's chair in the midst of the
still persisting disorder. He was greeted by the first rows with looks which
were evidently not over-friendly. (Of late, at the club, people almost seemed
not to like him, and treated him with much less respect than formerly.) But it
was something to the good that he was not hissed. I had had a strange idea in
my head ever since the previous day: I kept fancying that he would be received
with hisses as soon as he appeared. They scarcely noticed him, however, in the
disorder. What could that man hope for if Karmazinov was treated like this? He
was pale; it was ten years since he had appeared before an audience. From his
excitement and from all that I knew so well in him, it was clear to me that he,
too, regarded his present appearance on the platform as a turning-point of his
fate, or something of the kind. That was just what I was afraid of. The man was
dear to me. And what were my feelings when he opened his lips and I heard his
first phrase?

"Ladies and gentlemen," he pronounced suddenly, as though resolved to venture
everything, though in an almost breaking voice. "Ladies and gentlemen! Only
this morning there lay before me one of the illegal leaflets that have been
distributed here lately, and I asked myself for the hundredth time, 'Wherein
lies its secret?'"

The whole hall became instantly still, all looks were turned to him, some with
positive alarm. There was no denying, he knew how to secure their interest from
the first word. Heads were thrust out from behind the scenes; Liputin and
Lyamshin listened greedily. Yulia Mihailovna waved to me again.

"Stop him, whatever happens, stop him," she whispered in agitation. I could
only shrug my shoulders: how could one stop a man resolved to venture
everything? Alas, I understood what was in Stepan Trofimovitch's mind.

"Ha ha, the manifestoes!" was whispered in the audience; the whole hall was
stirred.

"Ladies and gentlemen, I've solved the whole mystery. The whole secret of their
effect lies in their stupidity." (His eyes flashed.) "Yes, gentlemen, if this
stupidity were intentional, pretended and calculated, oh, that would be a
stroke of genius! But we must do them justice: they don't pretend anything.
It's the barest, most simple-hearted, most shallow stupidity. _C'est la bêtise
dans son essence la plus pure, quelque chose comme un simple chimique._ If it
were expressed ever so little more cleverly, every one would see at once the
poverty of this shallow stupidity. But as it is, every one is left wondering:
no one can believe that it is such elementary stupidity. 'It's impossible that
there's nothing more in it,' every one says to himself and tries to find the
secret of it, sees a mystery in it, tries to read between the lines--the effect
is attained! Oh, never has stupidity been so solemnly rewarded, though it has
so often deserved it.... For, _en parenthese,_ stupidity is of as much service
to humanity as the loftiest genius...."

"Epigram of 1840" was commented, in a very modest voice, however, but it was
followed by a general outbreak of noise and uproar.

"Ladies and gentlemen, hurrah! I propose a toast to stupidity!" cried Stepan
Trofimovitch, defying the audience in a perfect frenzy.

I ran up on the pretext of pouring out some water for him.

"Stepan Trofimovitch, leave off, Yulia Mihailovna entreats you to."

"No, you leave me alone, idle young man," he cried out at me at the top of his
voice. I ran away. "Messieurs," he went on, "why this excitement, why the
outcries of indignation I hear? I have come forward with an olive branch. I
bring you the last word, for in this business I have the last word--and we
shall be reconciled."

"Down with him!" shouted some.

"Hush, let him speak, let him have his say!" yelled another section. The young
teacher was particularly excited; having once brought himself to speak he
seemed now unable to be silent.

"Messieurs, the last word in this business--is forgiveness. I, an old man at
the end of my life, I solemnly declare that the spirit of life breathes in us
still, and there is still a living strength in the young generation. The
enthusiasm of the youth of today is as pure and bright as in our age. All that
has happened is a change of aim, the replacing of one beauty by another! The
whole difficulty lies in the question which is more beautiful, Shakespeare or
boots, Raphael or petroleum?"

"It's treachery!" growled some.

"Compromising questions!"

_"Agent provocateur!"_

"But I maintain," Stepan Trofimovitch shrilled at the utmost pitch of
excitement, "I maintain that Shakespeare and Raphael are more precious than the
emancipation of the serfs, more precious than Nationalism, more precious than
Socialism, more precious than the young generation, more precious than
chemistry, more precious than almost all humanity because they are the fruit,
the real fruit of all humanity and perhaps the highest fruit that can be. A
form of beauty already attained, but for the attaining of which I would not
perhaps consent to live.... Oh, heavens!" he cried, clasping his hands, "ten
years ago I said the same thing from the platform in Petersburg, exactly the
same thing, in the same words, and in just the same way they did not understand
it, they laughed and hissed as now; shallow people, what is lacking in you that
you cannot understand? But let me tell you, let me tell you, without the
English, life is still possible for humanity, without Germany, life is
possible, without the Russians it is only too possible, without science,
without bread, life is possible--only without beauty it is impossible, for
there will be nothing left in the world. That's the secret at the bottom of
everything, that's what history teaches! Even science would not exist a moment
without beauty--do you know that, you who laugh--it will sink into bondage, you
won't invent a nail even!... I won't yield an inch!" he shouted absurdly in
confusion, and with all his might banged his fist on the table.

But all the while that he was shrieking senselessly and incoherently, the
disorder in the hall increased. Many people jumped up from their seats, some
dashed forward, nearer to the platform. It all happened much more quickly than
I describe it, and there was no time to take steps, perhaps no wish to, either.

"It's all right for you, with everything found for you, you pampered
creatures!" the same divinity student bellowed at the foot of the platform,
grinning with relish at Stepan Trofimovitch, who noticed it and darted to the
very edge of the platform.

"Haven't I, haven't I just declared that the enthusiasm of the young generation
is as pure and bright as it was, and that it is coming to grief through being
deceived only in the forms of beauty! Isn't that enough for you? And if you
consider that he who proclaims this is a father crushed and insulted, can
one--oh, shallow hearts--can one rise to greater heights of impartiality and
fairness?... Ungrateful... unjust.... Why, why can't you be reconciled!"

And he burst into hysterical sobs. He wiped away his dropping tears with his
fingers. His shoulders and breast were heaving with sobs. He was lost to
everything in the world.

A perfect panic came over the audience, almost all got up from their seats.
Yulia Mihailovna, too, jumped up quickly, seizing her husband by the arm and
pulling him up too.... The scene was beyond all belief.

"Stepan Trofimovitch!" the divinity student roared gleefully. "There's Fedka
the convict wandering about the town and the neighbourhood, escaped from
prison. He is a robber and has recently committed another murder. Allow me to
ask you: if you had not sold him as a recruit fifteen years ago to pay a
gambling debt, that is, more simply, lost him at cards, tell me, would he have
got into prison? Would he have cut men's throats now, in his struggle for
existence? What do you say, Mr. Æsthete?"

I decline to describe the scene that followed. To begin with there was a
furious volley of applause. The applause did not come from all--probably from
some fifth part of the audience--but they applauded furiously. The rest of the
public made for the exit, but as the applauding part of the audience kept
pressing forward towards the platform, there was a regular block. The ladies
screamed, some of the girls began to cry and asked to go home. Lembke, standing
up by his chair, kept gazing wildly about him. Yulia Mihailovna completely lost
her head--for the first time during her career amongst us. As for Stepan
Trofimovitch, for the first moment he seemed literally crushed by the divinity
student's words, but he suddenly raised his arms as though holding them out
above the public and yelled:

"I shake the dust from off my feet and I curse you.... It's the end, the
end...."

And turning, he ran behind the scenes, waving his hands menacingly.

"He has insulted the audience!... Verhovensky!" the angry section roared. They
even wanted to rush in pursuit of him. It was impossible to appease them, at
the moment, any way, and--a final catastrophe broke like a bomb on the assembly
and exploded in its midst: the third reader, the maniac who kept waving his
fist behind the scenes, suddenly ran on to the platform. He looked like a
perfect madman. With a broad, triumphant smile, full of boundless
self-confidence, he looked round at the agitated hall and he seemed to be
delighted at the disorder. He was not in the least disconcerted at having to
speak in such an uproar, on the contrary, he was obviously delighted. This was
so obvious that it attracted attention at once.

"What's this now?" people were heard asking. "Who is this? Sh-h! What does he
want to say?"

"Ladies and gentlemen," the maniac shouted with all his might, standing at the
very edge of the platform and speaking with almost as shrill, feminine a voice
as Karmazinov's, but without the aristocratic lisp. "Ladies and gentlemen!
Twenty years ago, on the eve of war with half Europe, Russia was regarded as an
ideal country by officials of all ranks! Literature was in the service of the
censorship; military drill was all that was taught at the universities; the
troops were trained like a ballet, and the peasants paid the taxes and were
mute under the lash of serfdom. Patriotism meant the wringing of bribes from
the quick and the dead. Those who did not take bribes were looked upon as
rebels because they disturbed the general harmony. The birch copses were
extirpated in support of discipline. Europe trembled.... But never in the
thousand years of its senseless existence had Russia sunk to such ignominy...."

He raised his fist, waved it ecstatically and menacingly over his head and
suddenly brought it down furiously, as though pounding an adversary to powder.
A frantic yell rose from the whole hall, there was a deafening roar of
applause; almost half the audience was applauding: their enthusiasm was
excusable. Russia was being put to shame publicly, before every one. Who could
fail to roar with delight?

"This is the real thing! Come, this is something like! Hurrah! Yes, this is
none of your æsthetics!"

The maniac went on ecstatically:

"Twenty years have passed since then. Universities have been opened and
multiplied. Military drill has passed into a legend; officers are too few by
thousands, the railways have eaten up all the capital and have covered Russia
as with a spider's web, so that in another fifteen years one will perhaps get
somewhere. Bridges are rarely on fire, and fires in towns occur only at regular
intervals, in turn, at the proper season. In the law courts judgments are as
wise as Solomon's, and the jury only take bribes through the struggle for
existence, to escape starvation. The serfs are free, and flog one another
instead of being flogged by the land-owners. Seas and oceans of vodka are
consumed to support the budget, and in Novgorod, opposite the ancient and
useless St. Sophia, there has been solemnly put up a colossal bronze globe to
celebrate a thousand years of disorder and confusion; Europe scowls and begins
to be uneasy again.... Fifteen years of reforms! And yet never even in the most
grotesque periods of its madness has Russia sunk..."

The last words could not be heard in the roar of the crowd. One could see him
again raise his arm and bring it down triumphantly again. Enthusiasm was beyond
all bounds: people yelled, clapped their hands, even some of the ladies
shouted: "Enough, you can't beat that!" Some might have been drunk. The orator
scanned them all and seemed revelling in his own triumph. I caught a glimpse of
Lembke in indescribable excitement, pointing something out to somebody. Yulia
Mihailovna, with a pale face, said something in haste to the prince, who had
run up to her. But at that moment a group of six men, officials more or less,
burst on to the platform, seized the orator and dragged him behind the scenes.
I can't understand how he managed to tear himself away from them, but he did
escape, darted up to the edge of the platform again and succeeded in shouting
again, at the top of his voice, waving his fist: "But never has Russia sunk..."

But he was dragged away again. I saw some fifteen men dash behind the scenes to
rescue him, not crossing the platform but breaking down the light screen at the
side of it.... I saw afterwards, though I could hardly believe my eyes, the
girl student (Virginsky's sister) leap on to the platform with the same roll
under her arm, dressed as before, as plump and rosy as ever, surrounded by two
or three women and two or three men, and accompanied by her mortal enemy, the
schoolboy. I even caught the phrase:

"Ladies and gentlemen, I've come to call attention to the sufferings of poor
students and to rouse them to a general protest..."

But I ran away. Hiding my badge in my pocket I made my way from the house into
the street by back passages which I knew of. First of all, of course, I went to
Stepan Trofimovitch's.

