# PART III - CHAPTER VII. STEPAN TROFIMOVITCH'S LAST WANDERING - II
[Metadata]: # {03.07.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {03.07.02.01}
"You see, my friend... you'll allow me to call myself your friend, n'est-ce
pas?" Stepan Trofimovitch began hurriedly as soon as the trap started. "You see
I... _J'aime le peuple, c'est indispensable, mais il me semble que je ne
m'avais jamais vu de près. Stasie... cela va sans dire qu'elle est aussi du
peuple, mais le vrai peuple,_ that is, the real ones, who are on the high road,
it seems to me they care for nothing, but where exactly I am going... But let
bygones be bygones. I fancy I am talking at random, but I believe it's from
being flustered."

"You don't seem quite well." Sofya Matveyevna watched him keenly though
respectfully.

"No, no, I must only wrap myself up, besides there's a fresh wind, very fresh
in fact, but... let us forget that. That's not what I really meant to say.
_Chère et incomparable amie,_ I feel that I am almost happy, and it's your
doing. Happiness is not good for me for it makes me rush to forgive all my
enemies at once...."

"Why, that's a very good thing, sir."

"Not always, _chère innocente. L'Evangile... voyez-vous, désormais nous
prêcherons ensemble_ and I will gladly sell your beautiful little books. Yes, I
feel that that perhaps is an idea, _quelque chose de très nouveau dans ce
genre._ The peasants are religious, _c'est admis,_ but they don't yet know the
gospel. I will expound it to them.... By verbal explanation one might correct
the mistakes in that remarkable book, which I am of course prepared to treat
with the utmost respect. I will be of service even on the high road. I've
always been of use, I always told _them_ so _et à cette chère ingrate...._ Oh,
we will forgive, we will forgive, first of all we will forgive all and
always.... We will hope that we too shall be forgiven. Yes, for all, every one
of us, have wronged one another, all are guilty!"

"That's a very good saying, I think, sir."

"Yes, yes.... I feel that I am speaking well. I shall speak to them very well,
but what was the chief thing I meant to say? I keep losing the thread and
forgetting.... Will you allow me to remain with you? I feel that the look in
your eyes and... I am surprised in fact at your manners. You are
simple-hearted, you call me 'sir,' and turn your cup upside down on your
saucer... and that horrid lump of sugar; but there's something charming about
you, and I see from your features.... Oh, don't blush and don't be afraid of me
as a man. _Chère et incomparable, pour moi une femme c'est tout._ I can't live
without a woman, but only at her side, only at her side... I am awfully
muddled, awfully. I can't remember what I meant to say. Oh, blessed is he to
whom God always sends a woman and... and I fancy, indeed, that I am in a sort
of ecstasy. There's a lofty idea in the open road too! That's what I meant to
say, that's it--about the idea. Now I've remembered it, but I kept losing it
before. And why have they taken us farther. It was nice there too, but
here--_cela devien trop froid. A propos, j'ai en tout quarante roubles et voilà
cet argent,_ take it, take it, I can't take care of it, I shall lose it or it
will be taken away from me.... I seem to be sleepy, I've a giddiness in my
head. Yes, I am giddy, I am giddy, I am giddy. Oh, how kind you are, what's
that you are wrapping me up in?"

"You are certainly in a regular fever and I've covered you with my rug; only
about the money, I'd rather."

"Oh, for God's sake, _n'en parlons plus parce que cela me fait mal._ Oh, how
kind you are!"

He ceased speaking, and with strange suddenness dropped into a feverish shivery
sleep. The road by which they drove the twelve miles was not a smooth one, and
their carriage jolted cruelly. Stepan Trofimovitch woke up frequently, quickly
raised his head from the little pillow which Sofya Matveyevna had slipped under
it, clutched her by the hand and asked "Are you here?" as though he were afraid
she had left him. He told her, too, that he had dreamed of gaping jaws full of
teeth, and that he had very much disliked it. Sofya Matveyevna was in great
anxiety about him.

They were driven straight up to a large cottage with a frontage of four windows
and other rooms in the yard. Stepan Trofimovitch waked up, hurriedly went in
and walked straight into the second room, which was the largest and best in the
house. An expression of fussiness came into his sleepy face. He spoke at once
to the landlady, a tall, thick-set woman of forty with very dark hair and a
slight moustache, and explained that he required the whole room for himself,
and that the door was to be shut and no one else was to be admitted, "_parce
que nous avons à parler. Oui, j'ai beaucoup à vous dire, chère amie._ I'll pay
you, I'll pay you," he said with a wave of dismissal to the landlady.

Though he was in a hurry, he seemed to articulate with difficulty. The landlady
listened grimly, and was silent in token of consent, but there was a feeling of
something menacing about her silence. He did not notice this, and hurriedly (he
was in a terrible hurry) insisted on her going away and bringing them their
dinner as quickly as possible, without a moment's delay.

At that point the moustached woman could contain herself no longer.

"This is not an inn, sir; we don't provide dinners for travellers. We can boil
you some crayfish or set the samovar, but we've nothing more. There won't be
fresh fish till to-morrow."

But Stepan Trofimovitch waved his hands, repeating with wrathful impatience:
"I'll pay, only make haste, make haste."

They settled on fish, soup, and roast fowl; the landlady declared that fowl was
not to be procured in the whole village; she agreed, however, to go in search
of one, but with the air of doing him an immense favour.

As soon as she had gone Stepan Trofimovitch instantly sat down on the sofa and
made Sofya Matveyevna sit down beside him. There were several arm-chairs as
well as a sofa in the room, but they were of a most uninviting appearance. The
room was rather a large one, with a corner, in which there was a bed,
partitioned off. It was covered with old and tattered yellow paper, and had
horrible lithographs of mythological subjects on the walls; in the corner
facing the door there was a long row of painted ikons and several sets of brass
ones. The whole room with its strangely ill-assorted furniture was an
unattractive mixture of the town element and of peasant traditions. But he did
not even glance at it all, nor look out of the window at the vast lake, the
edge of which was only seventy feet from the cottage.

"At last we are by ourselves and we will admit no one! I want to tell you
everything, everything from the very beginning."

Sofya Matveyevna checked him with great uneasiness.

"Are you aware, Stepan Trofimovitch?..."

_"Comment, vous savez déjà mon nom?"_ He smiled with delight.

"I heard it this morning from Anisim Ivanovitch when you were talking to him.
But I venture to tell you for my part..."

And she whispered hurriedly to him, looking nervously at the closed door for
fear anyone should overhear--that here in this village, it was dreadful. That
though all the peasants were fishermen, they made their living chiefly by
charging travellers every summer whatever they thought fit. The village was not
on the high road but an out-of-the-way one, and people only called there
because the steamers stopped there, and that when the steamer did not call--and
if the weather was in the least unfavourable, it would not--then numbers of
travellers would be waiting there for several days, and all the cottages in the
village would be occupied, and that was just the villagers' opportunity, for
they charged three times its value for everything--and their landlord here was
proud and stuck up because he was, for these parts, very rich; he had a net
which had cost a thousand roubles.

Stepan Trofimovitch looked almost reproachfully at Sofya Matveyevna's extremely
excited face, and several times he made a motion to stop her. But she persisted
and said all she had to say: she said she had been there before already in the
summer "with a very genteel lady from the town," and stayed there too for two
whole days till the steamer came, and what they had to put up with did not bear
thinking of. "Here, Stepan Trofimovitch, you've been pleased to ask for this
room for yourself alone.... I only speak to warn you.... In the other room
there are travellers already. An elderly man and a young man and a lady with
children, and by to-morrow before two o'clock the whole house will be filled
up, for since the steamer hasn't been here for two days it will be sure to come
to-morrow. So for a room apart and for ordering dinner, and for putting out the
other travellers, they'll charge you a price unheard of even in the
capital...."

But he was in distress, in real distress. "_Assez, mon enfant,_ I beseech you,
_nous avons notre argent--et après, le bon Dieu._ And I am surprised that, with
the loftiness of your ideas, you... _Assez, assez, vous me tourmentez,_" he
articulated hysterically, "we have all our future before us, and you... you
fill me with alarm for the future."

He proceeded at once to unfold his whole story with such haste that at first it
was difficult to understand him. It went on for a long time. The soup was
served, the fowl was brought in, followed at last by the samovar, and still he
talked on. He told it somewhat strangely and hysterically, and indeed he was
ill. It was a sudden, extreme effort of his intellectual faculties, which was
bound in his overstrained condition, of course--Sofya Matveyevna foresaw it
with distress all the time he was talking--to result immediately afterwards in
extreme exhaustion. He began his story almost with his childhood, when, "with
fresh heart, he ran about the meadows; it was an hour before he reached his two
marriages and his life in Berlin. I dare not laugh, however. It really was for
him a matter of the utmost importance, and to adopt the modern jargon, almost a
question of struggling for existence." He saw before him the woman whom he had
already elected to share his new life, and was in haste to consecrate her, so
to speak. His genius must not be hidden from her.... Perhaps he had formed a
very exaggerated estimate of Sofya Matveyevna, but he had already chosen her.
He could not exist without a woman. He saw clearly from her face that she
hardly understood him, and could not grasp even the most essential part. "_Ce
n'est rien, nous attendrons,_ and meanwhile she can feel it intuitively.... My
friend, I need nothing but your heart!" he exclaimed, interrupting his
narrative, "and that sweet enchanting look with which you are gazing at me now.
Oh, don't blush! I've told you already..." The poor woman who had fallen into
his hands found much that was obscure, especially when his autobiography almost
passed into a complete dissertation on the fact that no one had been ever able
to understand Stepan Trofimovitch, and that "men of genius are wasted in
Russia." It was all "so very intellectual," she reported afterwards dejectedly.
She listened in evident misery, rather round-eyed. When Stepan Trofimovitch
fell into a humorous vein and threw off witty sarcasms at the expense of our
advanced and governing classes, she twice made grievous efforts to laugh in
response to his laughter, but the result was worse than tears, so that Stepan
Trofimovitch was at last embarrassed by it himself and attacked "the nihilists
and modern people" with all the greater wrath and zest. At this point he simply
alarmed her, and it was not until he began upon the romance of his life that
she felt some slight relief, though that too was deceptive. A woman is always a
woman even if she is a nun. She smiled, shook her head and then blushed crimson
and dropped her eyes, which roused Stepan Trofimovitch to absolute ecstasy and
inspiration so much that he began fibbing freely. Varvara Petrovna appeared in
his story as an enchanting brunette (who had been the rage of Petersburg and
many European capitals) and her husband "had been struck down on the field of
Sevastopol" simply because he had felt unworthy of her love, and had yielded
her to his rival, that is, Stepan Trofimovitch.... "Don't be shocked, my gentle
one, my Christian," he exclaimed to Sofya Matveyevna, almost believing himself
in all that he was telling, "it was something so lofty, so subtle, that we
never spoke of it to one another all our lives." As the story went on, the
cause of this position of affairs appeared to be a blonde lady (if not Darya
Pavlovna I don't know of whom Stepan Trofimovitch could have been thinking),
this blonde owed everything to the brunette, and had grown up in her house,
being a distant relation. The brunette observing at last the love of the blonde
girl to Stepan Trofimovitch, kept her feelings locked up in her heart. The
blonde girl, noticing on her part the love of the brunette to Stepan
Trofimovitch, also locked her feelings in her own heart. And all three, pining
with mutual magnanimity, kept silent in this way for twenty years, locking
their feelings in their hearts. "Oh, what a passion that was, what a passion
that was!" he exclaimed with a stifled sob of genuine ecstasy. "I saw the full
blooming of her beauty" (of the brunette's, that is), "I saw daily with an ache
in my heart how she passed by me as though ashamed she was so fair" (once he
said "ashamed she was so fat"). At last he had run away, casting off all this
feverish dream of twenty years--_vingt ans_--and now here he was on the high
road....

Then in a sort of delirium be began explaining to Sofya Matveyevna the
significance of their meeting that day, "so chance an encounter and so fateful
for all eternity." Sofya Matveyevna got up from the sofa in terrible confusion
at last. He had positively made an attempt to drop on his knees before her,
which made her cry. It was beginning to get dark. They had been for some hours
shut up in the room....

"No, you'd better let me go into the other room," she faltered, "or else
there's no knowing what people may think...."

She tore herself away at last; he let her go, promising her to go to bed at
once. As they parted he complained that he had a bad headache. Sofya Matveyevna
had on entering the cottage left her bag and things in the first room, meaning
to spend the night with the people of the house; but she got no rest.

In the night Stepan Trofimovitch was attacked by the malady with which I and
all his friends were so familiar--the summer cholera, which was always the
outcome of any nervous strain or moral shock with him. Poor Sofya Matveyevna
did not sleep all night. As in waiting on the invalid she was obliged pretty
often to go in and out of the cottage through the landlady's room, the latter,
as well as the travellers who were sleeping there, grumbled and even began
swearing when towards morning she set about preparing the samovar. Stepan
Trofimovitch was half unconscious all through the attack; at times he had a
vision of the samovar being set, of someone giving him something to drink
(raspberry tea), and putting something warm to his stomach and his chest. But
he felt almost every instant that she was here, beside him; that it was she
going out and coming in, lifting him off the bed and settling him in it again.
Towards three o'clock in the morning he began to be easier; he sat up, put his
legs out of bed and thinking of nothing he fell on the floor at her feet. This
was a very different matter from the kneeling of the evening; he simply bowed
down at her feet and kissed the hem of her dress.

"Don't, sir, I am not worth it," she faltered, trying to get him back on to the
bed.

"My saviour," he cried, clasping his hands reverently before her. "_Vous êtes
noble comme une marquise!_ I--I am a wretch. Oh, I've been dishonest all my
life...."

"Calm yourself!" Sofya Matveyevna implored him.

"It was all lies that I told you this evening--to glorify myself, to make it
splendid, from pure wantonness--all, all, every word, oh, I am a wretch, I am a
wretch!"

The first attack was succeeded in this way by a second--an attack of hysterical
remorse. I have mentioned these attacks already when I described his letters to
Varvara Petrovna. He suddenly recalled Lise and their meeting the previous
morning. "It was so awful, and there must have been some disaster and I didn't
ask, didn't find out! I thought only of myself. Oh, what's the matter with her?
Do you know what's the matter with her?" he besought Sofya Matveyevna.

Then he swore that "he would never change," that he would go back to her (that
is, Varvara Petrovna). "We" (that is, he and Sofya Matveyevna) "will go to her
steps every day when she is getting into her carriage for her morning drive,
and we will watch her in secret.... Oh, I wish her to smite me on the other
cheek; it's a joy to wish it! I shall turn her my other cheek _comme dans votre
livre!_ Only now for the first time I understand what is meant by... turning
the other cheek. I never understood before!"

The two days that followed were among the most terrible in Sofya Matveyevna's
life; she remembers them with a shudder to this day. Stepan Trofimovitch became
so seriously ill that he could not go on board the steamer, which on this
occasion arrived punctually at two o'clock in the afternoon. She could not
bring herself to leave him alone, so she did not leave for Spasov either. From
her account he was positively delighted at the steamer's going without him.

"Well, that's a good thing, that's capital!" he muttered in his bed. "I've been
afraid all the time that we should go. Here it's so nice, better than
anywhere.... You won't leave me? Oh, you have not left me!"

It was by no means so nice "here", however. He did not care to hear of her
difficulties; his head was full of fancies and nothing else. He looked upon his
illness as something transitory, a trifling ailment, and did not think about it
at all; he thought of nothing but how they would go and sell "these books." He
asked her to read him the gospel.

"I haven't read it for a long time... in the original. Some one may ask me
about it and I shall make a mistake; I ought to prepare myself after all."

She sat down beside him and opened the book.

"You read beautifully," he interrupted her after the first line. "I see, I see
I was not mistaken," he added obscurely but ecstatically. He was, in fact, in a
continual state of enthusiasm. She read the Sermon on the Mount.

"_Assez, assez, mon enfant,_ enough.... Don't you think that that is enough?"

And he closed his eyes helplessly. He was very weak, but had not yet lost
consciousness. Sofya Matveyevna was getting up, thinking that he wanted to
sleep. But he stopped her.

"My friend, I've been telling lies all my life. Even when I told the truth I
never spoke for the sake of the truth, but always for my own sake. I knew it
before, but I only see it now.... Oh, where are those friends whom I have
insulted with my friendship all my life? And all, all! _Savez-vous..._ perhaps
I am telling lies now; no doubt I am telling lies now. The worst of it is that
I believe myself when I am lying. The hardest thing in life is to live without
telling lies... and without believing in one's lies. Yes, yes, that's just
it.... But wait a bit, that can all come afterwards.... We'll be together,
together," he added enthusiastically.

"Stepan Trofimovitch," Sofya Matveyevna asked timidly, "hadn't I better send to
the town for the doctor?"

He was tremendously taken aback.

"What for? _Est-ce que je suis si malade? Mais rien de sérieux._ What need have
we of outsiders? They may find, besides--and what will happen then? No, no, no
outsiders and we'll be together."

"Do you know," he said after a pause, "read me something more, just the first
thing you come across."

Sofya Matveyevna opened the Testament and began reading.

"Wherever it opens, wherever it happens to open," he repeated.

"'And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans...'"

"What's that? What is it? Where is that from?"

"It's from the Revelation."

"_Oh, je m'en souviens, oui, l'Apocalypse. Lisez, lisez,_ I am trying our
future fortunes by the book. I want to know what has turned up. Read on from
there...."

"'And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write: These things saith
the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the   creation of
God;

"'I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot;   I would thou wert
cold or hot.

"'So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot,   I will spue
thee out of my mouth.

"'Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased with goods,   and have need of
nothing: and thou knowest not that thou art wretched,   and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked.'"

"That too... and that's in your book too!" he exclaimed, with flashing eyes and
raising his head from the pillow. "I never knew that grand passage! You hear,
better be cold, better be cold than lukewarm, than only lukewarm. Oh, I'll
prove it! Only don't leave me, don't leave me alone! We'll prove it, we'll
prove it!"

"I won't leave you, Stepan Trofimovitch. I'll never leave you!" She took his
hand, pressed it in both of hers, and laid it against her heart, looking at him
with tears in her eyes. ("I felt very sorry for him at that moment," she said,
describing it afterwards.)

His lips twitched convulsively.

"But, Stepan Trofimovitch, what are we to do though? Oughtn't we to let some of
your friends know, or perhaps your relations?"

But at that he was so dismayed that she was very sorry that she had spoken of
it again. Trembling and shaking, he besought her to fetch no one, not to do
anything. He kept insisting, "No one, no one! We'll be alone, by ourselves,
alone, _nous partirons ensemble._"

Another difficulty was that the people of the house too began to be uneasy;
they grumbled, and kept pestering Sofya Matveyevna. She paid them and managed
to let them see her money. This softened them for the time, but the man
insisted on seeing Stepan Trofimovitch's "papers." The invalid pointed with a
supercilious smile to his little bag. Sofya Matveyevna found in it the
certificate of his having resigned his post at the university, or something of
the kind, which had served him as a passport all his life. The man persisted,
and said that "he must be taken somewhere, because their house wasn't a
hospital, and if he were to die there might be a bother. We should have no end
of trouble." Sofya Matveyevna tried to speak to him of the doctor, but it
appeared that sending to the town would cost so much that she had to give up
all idea of the doctor. She returned in distress to her invalid. Stepan
Trofimovitch was getting weaker and weaker.

"Now read me another passage.... About the pigs," he said suddenly.

"What?" asked Sofya Matveyevna, very much alarmed.

"About the pigs... that's there too... _ces cochons._ I remember the devils
entered into swine and they all were drowned. You must read me that; I'll tell
you why afterwards. I want to remember it word for word. I want it word for
word."

Sofya Matveyevna knew the gospel well and at once found the passage in St. Luke
which I have chosen as the motto of my record. I quote it here again:

"'And there was there one herd of many swine feeding on the mountain;   and
they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them. And   he
suffered them.

"'Then went the devils out of the man and entered into the swine;   and the
herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were   choked.

"'When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went and   told it
in the city and in the country.

"'Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus and found   the
man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of   Jesus,
clothed, and in his right mind; and they were afraid.'"

"My friend," said Stepan Trofimovitch in great excitement "_savez-vous,_ that
wonderful and... extraordinary passage has been a stumbling-block to me all my
life... _dans ce livre_.... so much so that I remembered those verses from
childhood. Now an idea has occurred to me; _une comparaison._ A great number of
ideas keep coming into my mind now. You see, that's exactly like our Russia,
those devils that come out of the sick man and enter into the swine. They are
all the sores, all the foul contagions, all the impurities, all the devils
great and small that have multiplied in that great invalid, our beloved Russia,
in the course of ages and ages. _Oui, cette Russie que j'aimais toujours._ But
a great idea and a great Will will encompass it from on high, as with that
lunatic possessed of devils... and all those devils will come forth, all the
impurity, all the rottenness that was putrefying on the surface ... and they
will beg of themselves to enter into swine; and indeed maybe they have entered
into them already! They are we, we and those... and Petrusha and _les autres
avec lui..._ and I perhaps at the head of them, and we shall cast ourselves
down, possessed and raving, from the rocks into the sea, and we shall all be
drowned--and a good thing too, for that is all we are fit for. But the sick man
will be healed and 'will sit at the feet of Jesus,' and all will look upon him
with astonishment.... My dear, _vous comprendrez après,_ but now it excites me
very much.... _Vous comprendrez après. Nous comprendrons ensemble._"

He sank into delirium and at last lost consciousness. So it went on all the
following day. Sofya Matveyevna sat beside him, crying. She scarcely slept at
all for three nights, and avoided seeing the people of the house, who were, she
felt, beginning to take some steps. Deliverance only came on the third day. In
the morning Stepan Trofimovitch returned to consciousness, recognised her, and
held out his hand to her. She crossed herself hopefully. He wanted to look out
of the window. _"Tiens, un lac!"_ he said. "Good heavens, I had not seen it
before!..." At that moment there was the rumble of a carriage at the cottage
door and a great hubbub in the house followed.

