# PART II - CHAPTER IV. ALL IN EXPECTATION - I
[Metadata]: # {02.04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.04.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {02.04.01.01}
The impression made on the whole neighbourhood by the story of the duel, which
was rapidly noised abroad, was particularly remarkable from the unanimity with
which every one hastened to take up the cudgels for Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.
Many of his former enemies declared themselves his friends. The chief reason
for this change of front in public opinion was chiefly due to one person, who
had hitherto not expressed her opinion, but who now very distinctly uttered a
few words, which at once gave the event a significance exceedingly interesting
to the vast majority. This was how it happened. On the day after the duel, all
the town was assembled at the Marshal of Nobility's in honour of his wife's
nameday. Yulia Mihailovna was present, or, rather, presided, accompanied by
Lizaveta Nikolaevna, radiant with beauty and peculiar gaiety, which struck many
of our ladies at once as particularly suspicious at this time. And I may
mention, by the way, her engagement to Mavriky Nikolaevitch was by now an
established fact. To a playful question from a retired general of much
consequence, of whom we shall have more to say later, Lizaveta Nikolaevna
frankly replied that evening that she was engaged. And only imagine, not one of
our ladies would believe in her engagement. They all persisted in assuming a
romance of some sort, some fatal family secret, something that had happened in
Switzerland, and for some reason imagined that Yulia Mihailovna must have had
some hand in it. It was difficult to understand why these rumours, or rather
fancies, persisted so obstinately, and why Yulia Mihailovna was so positively
connected with it. As soon as she came in, all turned to her with strange
looks, brimful of expectation. It must be observed that owing to the freshness
of the event, and certain circumstances accompanying it, at the party people
talked of it with some circumspection, in undertones. Besides, nothing yet was
known of the line taken by the authorities. As far as was known, neither of the
combatants had been troubled by the police. Every one knew, for instance, that
Gaganov had set off home early in the morning to Duhovo, without being
hindered. Meanwhile, of course, all were eager for someone to be the first to
speak of it aloud, and so to open the door to the general impatience. They
rested their hopes on the general above-mentioned, and they were not
disappointed.

This general, a landowner, though not a wealthy one, was one of the most
imposing members of our club, and a man of an absolutely unique turn of mind.
He flirted in the old-fashioned way with the young ladies, and was particularly
fond, in large assemblies, of speaking aloud with all the weightiness of a
general, on subjects to which others were alluding in discreet whispers. This
was, so to say, his special rôle in local society. He drawled, too, and spoke
with peculiar suavity, probably having picked up the habit from Russians
travelling abroad, or from those wealthy landowners of former days who had
suffered most from the emancipation. Stepan Trofimovitch had observed that the
more completely a landowner was ruined, the more suavely he lisped and drawled
his words. He did, as a fact, lisp and drawl himself, but was not aware of it
in himself.

The general spoke like a person of authority. He was, besides, a distant
relation of Gaganov's, though he was on bad terms with him, and even engaged in
litigation with him. He had, moreover, in the past, fought two duels himself,
and had even been degraded to the ranks and sent to the Caucasus on account of
one of them. Some mention was made of Varvara Petrovna's having driven out that
day and the day before, after being kept indoors "by illness," though the
allusion was not to her, but to the marvellous matching of her four grey horses
of the Stavrogins' own breeding. The general suddenly observed that he had met
"young Stavrogin" that day, on horseback.... Every one was instantly silent.
The general munched his lips, and suddenly proclaimed, twisting in his fingers
his presentation gold snuff-box.

"I'm sorry I wasn't here some years ago... I mean when I was at Carlsbad...
H'm! I'm very much interested in that young man about whom I heard so many
rumours at that time. H'm! And, I say, is it true that he's mad? Some one told
me so then. Suddenly I'm told that he has been insulted by some student here,
in the presence of his cousins, and he slipped under the table to get away from
him. And yesterday I heard from Stepan Vysotsky that Stavrogin had been
fighting with Gaganov. And simply with the gallant object of offering himself
as a target to an infuriated man, just to get rid of him. H'm! Quite in the
style of the guards of the twenties. Is there any house where he visits here?"

The general paused as though expecting an answer. A way had been opened for the
public impatience to express itself.

"What could be simpler?" cried Yulia Mihailovna, raising her voice, irritated
that all present had turned their eyes upon her, as though at a word of
command. "Can one wonder that Stavrogin fought Gaganov and took no notice of
the student? He couldn't challenge a man who used to be his serf!"

A noteworthy saying! A clear and simple notion, yet it had entered nobody's
head till that moment. It was a saying that had extraordinary consequences. All
scandal and gossip, all the petty tittle-tattle was thrown into the background,
another significance had been detected. A new character was revealed whom all
had misjudged; a character, almost ideally severe in his standards. Mortally
insulted by a student, that is, an educated man, no longer a serf, he despised
the affront because his assailant had once been his serf. Society had gossiped
and slandered him; shallow-minded people had looked with contempt on a man who
had been struck in the face. He had despised a public opinion, which had not
risen to the level of the highest standards, though it discussed them.

"And, meantime, you and I, Ivan Alexandrovitch, sit and discuss the correct
standards," one old club member observed to another, with a warm and generous
glow of self-reproach.

"Yes, Pyotr Mihailovitch, yes," the other chimed in with zest, "talk of the
younger generation!"

"It's not a question of the younger generation," observed a third, putting in
his spoke, "it's nothing to do with the younger generation; he's a star, not
one of the younger generation; that's the way to look at it."

"And it's just that sort we need; they're rare people." The chief point in all
this was that the "new man," besides showing himself an unmistakable nobleman,
was the wealthiest landowner in the province, and was, therefore, bound to be a
leading man who could be of assistance. I've already alluded in passing to the
attitude of the landowners of our province. People were enthusiastic:

"He didn't merely refrain from challenging the student. He put his hands behind
him, note that particularly, your excellency," somebody pointed out.

"And he didn't haul him up before the new law-courts, either," added another.

"In spite of the fact that for a personal insult to a nobleman he'd have got
fifteen roubles damages! He he he!"

"No, I'll tell you a secret about the new courts," cried a third, in a frenzy
of excitement, "if anyone's caught robbing or swindling and convicted, he'd
better run home while there's yet time, and murder his mother. He'll be
acquitted of everything at once, and ladies will wave their batiste
handkerchiefs from the platform. It's the absolute truth!"

"It's the truth. It's the truth!"

The inevitable anecdotes followed: Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's friendly relations
with Count K. were recalled. Count K.'s stern and independent attitude to
recent reforms was well known, as well as his remarkable public activity,
though that had somewhat fallen off of late. And now, suddenly, every one was
positive that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was betrothed to one of the count's
daughters, though nothing had given grounds for such a supposition. And as for
some wonderful adventures in Switzerland with Lizaveta Nikolaevna, even the
ladies quite dropped all reference to it. I must mention, by the way, that the
Drozdovs had by this time succeeded in paying all the visits they had omitted
at first. Every one now confidently considered Lizaveta Nikolaevna a most
ordinary girl, who paraded her delicate nerves. Her fainting on the day of
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's arrival was explained now as due to her terror at the
student's outrageous behaviour. They even increased the prosaicness of that to
which before they had striven to give such a fantastic colour. As for a lame
woman who had been talked of, she was forgotten completely. They were ashamed
to remember her.

"And if there had been a hundred lame girls--we've all been young once!"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's respectfulness to his mother was enlarged upon.
Various virtues were discovered in him. People talked with approbation of the
learning he had acquired in the four years he had spent in German universities.
Gaganov's conduct was declared utterly tactless: "not knowing friend from foe."
Yulia Mihailovna's keen insight was unhesitatingly admitted.

So by the time Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch made his appearance among them he was
received by every one with naïve solemnity. In all eyes fastened upon him could
be read eager anticipation. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch at once wrapped himself in
the most austere silence, which, of course, gratified every one much more than
if he had talked till doomsday. In a word, he was a success, he was the
fashion. If once one has figured in provincial society, there's no retreating
into the background. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch began to fulfil all his social
duties in the province punctiliously as before. He was not found cheerful
company: "a man who has seen suffering; a man not like other people; he has
something to be melancholy about." Even the pride and disdainful aloofness for
which he had been so detested four years before was now liked and respected.

Varvara Petrovna was triumphant. I don't know whether she grieved much over the
shattering of her dreams concerning Lizaveta Nikolaevna. Family pride, of
course, helped her to get over it. One thing was strange: Varvara Petrovna was
suddenly convinced that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch really had "made his choice" at
Count K.'s. And what was strangest of all, she was led to believe it by rumours
which reached her on no better authority than other people. She was afraid to
ask Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch a direct question. Two or three times, however, she
could not refrain from slyly and good-humouredly reproaching him for not being
open with her. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch smiled and remained silent. The silence
was taken as a sign of assent. And yet, all the time she never forgot the
cripple. The thought of her lay like a stone on her heart, a nightmare, she was
tortured by strange misgivings and surmises, and all this at the same time as
she dreamed of Count K.'s daughters. But of this we shall speak later. Varvara
Petrovna began again, of course, to be treated with extreme deference and
respect in society, but she took little advantage of it and went out rarely.

She did, however, pay a visit of ceremony to the governor's wife. Of course, no
one had been more charmed and delighted by Yulia Mihailovna's words spoken at
the marshal's soirée than she. They lifted a load of care off her heart, and
had at once relieved much of the distress she had been suffering since that
luckless Sunday.

"I misunderstood that woman," she declared, and with her characteristic
impulsiveness she frankly told Yulia Mihailovna that she had come to _thank
her_. Yulia Mihailovna was flattered, but she behaved with dignity. She was
beginning about this time to be very conscious of her own importance, too much
so, in fact. She announced, for example, in the course of conversation, that
she had never heard of Stepan Trofimovitch as a leading man or a savant.

"I know young Verhovensky, of course, and make much of him. He's imprudent, but
then he's young; he's thoroughly well-informed, though. He's not an
out-of-date, old-fashioned critic, anyway." Varvara Petrovna hastened to
observe that Stepan Trofimovitch had never been a critic, but had, on the
contrary, spent all his life in her house. He was renowned through
circumstances of his early career, "only too well known to the whole world,"
and of late for his researches in Spanish history. Now he intended to write
also on the position of modern German universities, and, she believed,
something about the Dresden Madonna too. In short, Varvara Petrovna refused to
surrender Stepan Trofimovitch to the tender mercies of Yulia Mihailovna.

"The Dresden Madonna? You mean the Sistine Madonna? _Chère_ Varvara Petrovna, I
spent two hours sitting before that picture and came away utterly
disillusioned. I could make nothing of it and was in complete amazement.
Karmazinov, too, says it's hard to understand it. They all see nothing in it
now, Russians and English alike. All its fame is just the talk of the last
generation."

"Fashions are changed then?"

"What I think is that one mustn't despise our younger generation either. They
cry out that they're communists, but what I say is that we must appreciate them
and mustn't be hard on them. I read everything now--the papers, communism, the
natural sciences--I get everything because, after all, one must know where
one's living and with whom one has to do. One mustn't spend one's whole life on
the heights of one's own fancy. I've come to the conclusion, and adopted it as
a principle, that one must be kind to the young people and so keep them from
the brink. Believe me, Varvara Petrovna, that none but we who make up good
society can by our kindness and good influence keep them from the abyss towards
which they are brought by the intolerance of all these old men. I am glad
though to learn from you about Stepan Trofimovitch. You suggest an idea to me:
he may be useful at our literary matinée, you know I'm arranging for a whole
day of festivities, a subscription entertainment for the benefit of the poor
governesses of our province. They are scattered about Russia; in our district
alone we can reckon up six of them. Besides that, there are two girls in the
telegraph office, two are being trained in the academy, the rest would like to
be but have not the means. The Russian woman's fate is a terrible one, Varvara
Petrovna! It's out of that they're making the university question now, and
there's even been a meeting of the Imperial Council about it. In this strange
Russia of ours one can do anything one likes; and that, again, is why it's only
by the kindness and the direct warm sympathy of all the better classes that we
can direct this great common cause in the true path. Oh, heavens, have we many
noble personalities among us! There are some, of course, but they are scattered
far and wide. Let us unite and we shall be stronger. In one word, I shall first
have a literary matinée, then a light luncheon, then an interval, and in the
evening a ball. We meant to begin the evening by living pictures, but it would
involve a great deal of expense, and so, to please the public, there will be
one or two quadrilles in masks and fancy dresses, representing well-known
literary schools. This humorous idea was suggested by Karmazinov. He has been a
great help to me. Do you know he's going to read us the last thing he's
written, which no one has seen yet. He is laying down the pen, and will write
no more. This last essay is his farewell to the public. It's a charming little
thing called 'Merci.' The title is French; he thinks that more amusing and even
subtler. I do, too. In fact I advised it. I think Stepan Trofimovitch might
read us something too, if it were quite short and... not so very learned. I
believe Pyotr Stepanovitch and some one else too will read something. Pyotr
Stepanovitch shall run round to you and tell you the programme. Better still,
let me bring it to you myself."

"Allow me to put my name down in your subscription list too. I'll tell Stepan
Trofimovitch and will beg him to consent."

Varvara Petrovna returned home completely fascinated. She was ready to stand up
for Yulia Mihailovna through thick and thin, and for some reason was already
quite put out with Stepan Trofimovitch, while he, poor man, sat at home, all
unconscious.

"I'm in love with her. I can't understand how I could be so mistaken in that
woman," she said to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and Pyotr Stepanovitch, who dropped
in that evening.

"But you must make peace with the old man all the same," Pyotr Stepanovitch
submitted. "He's in despair. You've quite sent him to Coventry. Yesterday he
met your carriage and bowed, and you turned away. We'll trot him out, you know;
I'm reckoning on him for something, and he may still be useful."

"Oh, he'll read something."

"I don't mean only that. And I was meaning to drop in on him to-day. So shall I
tell him?"

"If you like. I don't know, though, how you'll arrange it," she said
irresolutely. "I was meaning to have a talk with him myself, and wanted to fix
the time and place."

She frowned.

"Oh, it's not worth while fixing a time. I'll simply give him the message."

"Very well, do. Add that I certainly will fix a time to see him though. Be sure
to say that too."

Pyotr Stepanovitch ran off, grinning. He was, in fact, to the best of my
recollection, particularly spiteful all this time, and ventured upon extremely
impatient sallies with almost every one. Strange to say, every one, somehow,
forgave him. It was generally accepted that he was not to be looked at from the
ordinary standpoint. I may remark that he took up an extremely resentful
attitude about Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's duel. It took him unawares. He turned
positively green when he was told of it. Perhaps his vanity was wounded: he
only heard of it next day when every one knew of it.

"You had no right to fight, you know," he whispered to Stavrogin, five days
later, when he chanced to meet him at the club. It was remarkable that they had
not once met during those five days, though Pyotr Stepanovitch had dropped in
at Varvara Petrovna's almost every day.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked at him in silence with an absent-minded air, as
though not understanding what was the matter, and he went on without stopping.
He was crossing the big hall of the club on his way to the refreshment room.

"You've been to see Shatov too.... You mean to make it known about Marya
Timofyevna," Pyotr Stepanovitch muttered, running after him, and, as though not
thinking of what he was doing he clutched at his shoulder.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch shook his hand off and turned round quickly to him with
a menacing scowl. Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at him with a strange, prolonged
smile. It all lasted only one moment. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch walked on.

