# PART II - CHAPTER I. NIGHT - IV
[Metadata]: # {02.01.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01.04}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# IV
[TreeTag]: # {02.01.04.01}
Perhaps he imagined, as he made his exit, that as soon as he was left alone,
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch would begin beating on the wall with his fists, and no
doubt he would have been glad to see this, if that had been possible. But, if
so, he was greatly mistaken. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was still calm. He
remained standing for two minutes in the same position by the table, apparently
plunged in thought, but soon a cold and listless smile came on to his lips. He
slowly sat down again in the same place in the corner of the sofa, and shut his
eyes as though from weariness. The corner of the letter was still peeping from
under the paperweight, but he didn't even move to cover it.

He soon sank into complete forgetfulness.

When Pyotr Stepanovitch went out without coming to see her, as he had promised,
Varvara Petrovna, who had been worn out by anxiety during these days, could not
control herself, and ventured to visit her son herself, though it was not her
regular time. She was still haunted by the idea that he would tell her
something conclusive. She knocked at the door gently as before, and again
receiving no answer, she opened the door. Seeing that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
was sitting strangely motionless, she cautiously advanced to the sofa with a
throbbing heart. She seemed struck by the fact that he could fall asleep so
quickly and that he could sleep sitting like that, so erect and motionless, so
that his breathing even was scarcely perceptible. His face was pale and
forbidding, but it looked, as it were, numb and rigid. His brows were somewhat
contracted and frowning. He positively had the look of a lifeless wax figure.
She stood over him for about three minutes, almost holding her breath, and
suddenly she was seized with terror. She withdrew on tiptoe, stopped at the
door, hurriedly made the sign of the cross over him, and retreated unobserved,
with a new oppression and a new anguish at her heart.

He slept a long while, more than an hour, and still in the same rigid pose: not
a muscle of his face twitched, there was not the faintest movement in his whole
body, and his brows were still contracted in the same forbidding frown. If
Varvara Petrovna had remained another three minutes she could not have endured
the stifling sensation that this motionless lethargy roused in her, and would
have waked him. But he suddenly opened his eyes, and sat for ten minutes as
immovable as before, staring persistently and curiously, as though at some
object in the corner which had struck him, although there was nothing new or
striking in the room.

Suddenly there rang out the low deep note of the clock on the wall.

With some uneasiness he turned to look at it, but almost at the same moment the
other door opened, and the butler, Alexey Yegorytch came in. He had in one hand
a greatcoat, a scarf, and a hat, and in the other a silver tray with a note on
it.

"Half-past nine," he announced softly, and laying the other things on a chair,
he held out the tray with the note--a scrap of paper unsealed and scribbled in
pencil. Glancing through it, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch took a pencil from the
table, added a few words, and put the note back on the tray.

"Take it back as soon as I have gone out, and now dress me," he said, getting
up from the sofa.

Noticing that he had on a light velvet jacket, he thought a minute, and told
the man to bring him a cloth coat, which he wore on more ceremonious occasions.
At last, when he was dressed and had put on his hat, he locked the door by
which his mother had come into the room, took the letter from under the
paperweight, and without saying a word went out into the corridor, followed by
Alexey Yegorytch. From the corridor they went down the narrow stone steps of
the back stairs to a passage which opened straight into the garden. In the
corner stood a lantern and a big umbrella.

"Owing to the excessive rain the mud in the streets is beyond anything," Alexey
Yegorytch announced, making a final effort to deter his master from the
expedition. But opening his umbrella the latter went without a word into the
damp and sodden garden, which was dark as a cellar. The wind was roaring and
tossing the bare tree-tops. The little sandy paths were wet and slippery.
Alexey Yegorytch walked along as he was, bareheaded, in his swallow-tail coat,
lighting up the path for about three steps before them with the lantern.

"Won't it be noticed?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch asked suddenly.

"Not from the windows. Besides I have seen to all that already," the old
servant answered in quiet and measured tones.

"Has my mother retired?"

"Her excellency locked herself in at nine o'clock as she has done the last few
days, and there is no possibility of her knowing anything. At what hour am I to
expect your honour?"

"At one or half-past, not later than two."

"Yes, sir."

Crossing the garden by the winding paths that they both knew by heart, they
reached the stone wall, and there in the farthest corner found a little door,
which led out into a narrow and deserted lane, and was always kept locked. It
appeared that Alexey Yegorytch had the key in his hand.

"Won't the door creak?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch inquired again.

But Alexey Yegorytch informed him that it had been oiled yesterday "as well as
to-day." He was by now wet through. Unlocking the door he gave the key to
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"If it should be your pleasure to be taking a distant walk, I would warn your
honour that I am not confident of the folk here, especially in the back lanes,
and especially beyond the river," he could not resist warning him again. He was
an old servant, who had been like a nurse to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, and at
one time used to dandle him in his arms; he was a grave and severe man who was
fond of listening to religious discourse and reading books of devotion.

"Don't be uneasy, Alexey Yegorytch."

"May God's blessing rest on you, sir, but only in your righteous undertakings."

"What?" said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, stopping short in the lane.

Alexey Yegorytch resolutely repeated his words. He had never before ventured to
express himself in such language in his master's presence.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch locked the door, put the key in his pocket, and crossed
the lane, sinking five or six inches into the mud at every step. He came out at
last into a long deserted street. He knew the town like the five fingers of his
hand, but Bogoyavlensky Street was a long way off. It was past ten when he
stopped at last before the locked gates of the dark old house that belonged to
Filipov. The ground floor had stood empty since the Lebyadkins had left it, and
the windows were boarded up, but there was a light burning in Shatov's room on
the second floor. As there was no bell he began banging on the gate with his
hand. A window was opened and Shatov peeped out into the street. It was
terribly dark, and difficult to make out anything. Shatov was peering out for
some time, about a minute.

"Is that you?" he asked suddenly.

"Yes," replied the uninvited guest.

Shatov slammed the window, went downstairs and opened the gate. Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch stepped over the high sill, and without a word passed by him
straight into Kirillov's lodge.

