# PART II - CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY - VII
[Metadata]: # {02.06.07}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.07}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY
VII
# VII
He had probably been very busy that day on all sorts of errands and probably
with success, which was reflected in the self-satisfied expression of his face
when at six o'clock that evening he turned up at Stavrogin's. But he was not at
once admitted: Stavrogin had just locked himself in the study with Mavriky
Nikolaevitch. This news instantly made Pyotr Stepanovitch anxious. He seated
himself close to the study door to wait for the visitor to go away. He could
hear conversation but could not catch the words. The visit did not last long;
soon he heard a noise, the sound of an extremely loud and abrupt voice, then
the door opened and Mavriky Nikolaevitch came out with a very pale face. He did
not notice Pyotr Stepanovitch, and quickly passed by. Pyotr Stepanovitch
instantly ran into the study.

I cannot omit a detailed account of the very brief interview that had taken
place between the two "rivals"--an interview which might well have seemed
impossible under the circumstances, but which had yet taken place.

This is how it had come about. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had been enjoying an
after-dinner nap on the couch in his study when Alexey Yegorytch had announced
the unexpected visitor. Hearing the name, he had positively leapt up, unwilling
to believe it. But soon a smile gleamed on his lips--a smile of haughty triumph
and at the same time of a blank, incredulous wonder. The visitor, Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, seemed struck by the expression of that smile as he came in;
anyway, he stood still in the middle of the room as though uncertain whether to
come further in or to turn back. Stavrogin succeeded at once in transforming
the expression of his face, and with an air of grave surprise took a step
towards him. The visitor did not take his outstretched hand, but awkwardly
moved a chair and, not uttering a word, sat down without waiting for his host
to do so. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat down on the sofa facing him obliquely
and, looking at Mavriky Nikolaevitch, waited in silence.

"If you can, marry Lizaveta Nikolaevna," Mavriky Nikolaevitch brought out
suddenly at last, and what was most curious, it was impossible to tell from his
tone whether it was an entreaty, a recommendation, a surrender, or a command.

Stavrogin still remained silent, but the visitor had evidently said all he had
come to say and gazed at him persistently, waiting for an answer.

"If I am not mistaken (but it's quite certain), Lizaveta Nikolaevna is already
betrothed to you," Stavrogin said at last.

"Promised and betrothed," Mavriky Nikolaevitch assented firmly and clearly.

"You have... quarrelled? Excuse me, Mavriky Nikolaevitch."

"No, she 'loves and respects me'; those are her words. Her words are more
precious than anything."

"Of that there can be no doubt."

"But let me tell you, if she were standing in the church at her wedding and you
were to call her, she'd give up me and every one and go to you."

"From the wedding?"

"Yes, and after the wedding."

"Aren't you making a mistake?"

"No. Under her persistent, sincere, and intense hatred for you love is flashing
out at every moment... and madness... the sincerest infinite love and...
madness! On the contrary, behind the love she feels for me, which is sincere
too, every moment there are flashes of hatred... the most intense hatred! I
could never have fancied all these transitions... before."

"But I wonder, though, how could you come here and dispose of the hand of
Lizaveta Nikolaevna? Have you the right to do so? Has she authorised you?"

Mavriky Nikolaevitch frowned and for a minute he looked down.

"That's all words on your part," he brought out suddenly, "words of revenge and
triumph; I am sure you can read between the lines, and is this the time for
petty vanity? Haven't you satisfaction enough? Must I really dot my i's and go
into it all? Very well, I will dot my i's, if you are so anxious for my
humiliation. I have no right, it's impossible for me to be authorised; Lizaveta
Nikolaevna knows nothing about it and her betrothed has finally lost his senses
and is only fit for a madhouse, and, to crown everything, has come to tell you
so himself. You are the only man in the world who can make her happy, and I am
the one to make her unhappy. You are trying to get her, you are pursuing her,
but--I don't know why--you won't marry her. If it's because of a lovers'
quarrel abroad and I must be sacrificed to end it, sacrifice me. She is too
unhappy and I can't endure it. My words are not a sanction, not a prescription,
and so it's no slur on your pride. If you care to take my place at the altar,
you can do it without any sanction from me, and there is no ground for me to
come to you with a mad proposal, especially as our marriage is utterly
impossible after the step I am taking now. I cannot lead her to the altar
feeling myself an abject wretch. What I am doing here and my handing her over
to you, perhaps her bitterest foe, is to my mind something so abject that I
shall never get over it."

"Will you shoot yourself on our wedding day?"

"No, much later. Why stain her bridal dress with my blood? Perhaps I shall not
shoot myself at all, either now or later."

"I suppose you want to comfort me by saying that?"

"You? What would the blood of one more mean to you?" He turned pale and his
eyes gleamed. A minute of silence followed.

"Excuse me for the questions I've asked you," Stavrogin began again; "some of
them I had no business to ask you, but one of them I think I have every right
to put to you. Tell me, what facts have led you to form a conclusion as to my
feelings for Lizaveta Nikolaevna? I mean to a conviction of a degree of feeling
on my part as would justify your coming here... and risking such a proposal."

"What?" Mavriky Nikolaevitch positively started. "Haven't you been trying to
win her? Aren't you trying to win her, and don't you want to win her?"

"Generally speaking, I can't speak of my feeling for this woman or that to a
third person or to anyone except the woman herself. You must excuse it, it's a
constitutional peculiarity. But to make up for it, I'll tell you the truth
about everything else; I am married, and it's impossible for me either to marry
or to try 'to win' anyone."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch was so astounded that he started back in his chair and for
some time stared fixedly into Stavrogin's face.

"Only fancy, I never thought of that," he muttered. "You said then, that
morning, that you were not married... and so I believed you were not married."

He turned terribly pale; suddenly he brought his fist down on the table with
all his might.

"If after that confession you don't leave Lizaveta Nikolaevna alone, if you
make her unhappy, I'll kill you with my stick like a dog in a ditch!"

He jumped up and walked quickly out of the room. Pyotr Stepanovitch, running
in, found his host in a most unexpected frame of mind.

"Ah, that's you!" Stavrogin laughed loudly; his laughter seemed to be provoked
simply by the appearance of Pyotr Stepanovitch as he ran in with such impulsive
curiosity.

"Were you listening at the door? Wait a bit. What have you come about? I
promised you something, didn't I? Ah, bah! I remember, to meet 'our fellows.'
Let us go. I am delighted. You couldn't have thought of anything more
appropriate." He snatched up his hat and they both went at once out of the
house.

"Are you laughing beforehand at the prospect of seeing 'our fellows'?" chirped
gaily Pyotr Stepanovitch, dodging round him with obsequious alacrity, at one
moment trying to walk beside his companion on the narrow brick pavement and at
the next running right into the mud of the road; for Stavrogin walked in the
middle of the pavement without observing that he left no room for anyone else.

"I am not laughing at all," he answered loudly and gaily; "on the contrary, I
am sure that you have the most serious set of people there."

"'Surly dullards,' as you once deigned to express it."

"Nothing is more amusing sometimes than a surly dullard."

"Ah, you mean Mavriky Nikolaevitch? I am convinced he came to give up his
betrothed to you, eh? I egged him on to do it, indirectly, would you believe
it? And if he doesn't give her up, we'll take her, anyway, won't we--eh?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch knew no doubt that he was running some risk in venturing on
such sallies, but when he was excited he preferred to risk anything rather than
to remain in uncertainty. Stavrogin only laughed.

"You still reckon you'll help me?" he asked.

"If you call me. But you know there's one way, and the best one."

"Do I know your way?"

"Oh no, that's a secret for the time. Only remember, a secret has its price."

"I know what it costs," Stavrogin muttered to himself, but he restrained
himself and was silent.

"What it costs? What did you say?" Pyotr Stepanovitch was startled.

"I said, 'Damn you and your secret!' You'd better be telling me who will be
there. I know that we are going to a name-day party, but who will be there?"

"Oh, all sorts! Even Kirillov."

"All members of circles?"

"Hang it all, you are in a hurry! There's not one circle formed yet."

"How did you manage to distribute so many manifestoes then?"

"Where we are going only four are members of the circle. The others on
probation are spying on one another with jealous eagerness, and bring reports
to me. They are a trustworthy set. It's all material which we must organise,
and then we must clear out. But you wrote the rules yourself, there's no need
to explain."

"Are things going badly then? Is there a hitch?"

"Going? Couldn't be better. It will amuse you: the first thing which has a
tremendous effect is giving them titles. Nothing has more influence than a
title. I invent ranks and duties on purpose; I have secretaries, secret spies,
treasurers, presidents, registrars, their assistants--they like it awfully,
it's taken capitally. Then, the next force is sentimentalism, of course. You
know, amongst us socialism spreads principally through sentimentalism. But the
trouble is these lieutenants who bite; sometimes you put your foot in it. Then
come the out-and-out rogues; well, they are a good sort, if you like, and
sometimes very useful; but they waste a lot of one's time, they want incessant
looking after. And the most important force of all--the cement that holds
everything together--is their being ashamed of having an opinion of their own.
That is a force! And whose work is it, whose precious achievement is it, that
not one idea of their own is left in their heads! They think originality a
disgrace."

"If so, why do you take so much trouble?"

"Why, if people lie simply gaping at every one, how can you resist annexing
them? Can you seriously refuse to believe in the possibility of success? Yes,
you have the faith, but one wants will. It's just with people like this that
success is possible. I tell you I could make them go through fire; one has only
to din it into them that they are not advanced enough. The fools reproach me
that I have taken in every one here over the central committee and 'the
innumerable branches.' You once blamed me for it yourself, but where's the
deception? You and I are the central committee and there will be as many
branches as we like."

"And always the same sort of rabble!"

"Raw material. Even they will be of use."

"And you are still reckoning on me?"

"You are the chief, you are the head; I shall only be a subordinate, your
secretary. We shall take to our barque, you know; the oars are of maple, the
sails are of silk, at the helm sits a fair maiden, Lizaveta Nikolaevna... hang
it, how does it go in the ballad?"

"He is stuck," laughed Stavrogin. "No, I'd better give you my version. There
you reckon on your fingers the forces that make up the circles. All that
business of titles and sentimentalism is a very good cement, but there is
something better; persuade four members of the circle to do for a fifth on the
pretence that he is a traitor, and you'll tie them all together with the blood
they've shed as though it were a knot. They'll be your slaves, they won't dare
to rebel or call you to account. Ha ha ha!"

"But you... you shall pay for those words," Pyotr Stepanovitch thought to
himself, "and this very evening, in fact. You go too far."

This or something like this must have been Pyotr Stepanovitch's reflection.
They were approaching Virginsky's house.

"You've represented me, no doubt, as a member from abroad, an inspector in
connection with the _Internationale?_" Stavrogin asked suddenly.

"No, not an inspector; you won't be an inspector; but you are one of the
original members from abroad, who knows the most important secrets--that's your
rôle. You are going to speak, of course?"

"What's put that idea into your head?"

"Now you are bound to speak."

Stavrogin positively stood still in the middle of the street in surprise, not
far from a street lamp. Pyotr Stepanovitch faced his scrutiny calmly and
defiantly. Stavrogin cursed and went on.

"And are you going to speak?" he suddenly asked Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"No, I am going to listen to you."

"Damn you, you really are giving me an idea!"

"What idea?" Pyotr Stepanovitch asked quickly.

"Perhaps I will speak there, but afterwards I will give you a hiding--and a
sound one too, you know."

"By the way, I told Karmazinov this morning that you said he ought to be
thrashed, and not simply as a form but to hurt, as they flog peasants."

"But I never said such a thing; ha ha!"

"No matter. _Se non è vero..._"

"Well, thanks. I am truly obliged."

"And another thing. Do you know, Karmazinov says that the essence of our creed
is the negation of honour, and that by the open advocacy of a right to be
dishonourable a Russian can be won over more easily than by anything."

"An excellent saying! Golden words!" cried Stavrogin. "He's hit the mark there!
The right to dishonour--why, they'd all flock to us for that, not one would
stay behind! And listen, Verhovensky, you are not one of the higher police, are
you?"

"Anyone who has a question like that in his mind doesn't utter it."

"I understand, but we are by ourselves."

"No, so far I am not one of the higher police. Enough, here we are. Compose
your features, Stavrogin; I always do mine when I go in. A gloomy expression,
that's all, nothing more is wanted; it's a very simple business."

