# PART II - CHAPTER V. ON THE EVE OF THE FETE - III
[Metadata]: # {02.05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.05.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER V. ON THE EVE OF THE FETE
III
# III
Almost at the same time, and certainly on the same day, the interview at last
took place between Stepan Trofimovitch and Varvara Petrovna. She had long had
this meeting in her mind, and had sent word about it to her former friend, but
for some reason she had kept putting it off till then. It took place at
Skvoreshniki; Varvara Petrovna arrived at her country house all in a bustle; it
had been definitely decided the evening before that the fête was to take place
at the marshal's, but Varvara Petrovna's rapid brain at once grasped that no
one could prevent her from afterwards giving her own special entertainment at
Skvoreshniki, and again assembling the whole town. Then every one could see for
themselves whose house was best, and in which more taste was displayed in
receiving guests and giving a ball. Altogether she was hardly to be recognised.
She seemed completely transformed, and instead of the unapproachable "noble
lady" (Stepan Trofimovitch's expression) seemed changed into the most
commonplace, whimsical society woman. But perhaps this may only have been on
the surface.

When she reached the empty house she had gone through all the rooms,
accompanied by her faithful old butler, Alexey Yegorytch, and by Fomushka, a
man who had seen much of life and was a specialist in decoration. They began to
consult and deliberate: what furniture was to be brought from the town house,
what things, what pictures, where they were to be put, how the conservatories
and flowers could be put to the best use, where to put new curtains, where to
have the refreshment rooms, whether one or two, and so on and so on. And,
behold, in the midst of this exciting bustle she suddenly took it into her head
to send for Stepan Trofimovitch.

The latter had long before received notice of this interview and was prepared
for it, and he had every day been expecting just such a sudden summons. As he
got into the carriage he crossed himself: his fate was being decided. He found
his friend in the big drawing-room on the little sofa in the recess, before a
little marble table with a pencil and paper in her hands. Fomushka, with a yard
measure, was measuring the height of the galleries and the windows, while
Varvara Petrovna herself was writing down the numbers and making notes on the
margin. She nodded in Stepan Trofimovitch's direction without breaking off from
what she was doing, and when the latter muttered some sort of greeting, she
hurriedly gave him her hand, and without looking at him motioned him to a seat
beside her.

"I sat waiting for five minutes, 'mastering my heart,'" he told me afterwards.
"I saw before me not the woman whom I had known for twenty years. An absolute
conviction that all was over gave me a strength which astounded even her. I
swear that she was surprised at my stoicism in that last hour."

Varvara Petrovna suddenly put down her pencil on the table and turned quickly
to Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Stepan Trofimovitch, we have to talk of business. I'm sure you have prepared
all your fervent words and various phrases, but we'd better go straight to the
point, hadn't we?"

She had been in too great a hurry to show the tone she meant to take. And what
might not come next?

"Wait, be quiet; let me speak. Afterwards you shall, though really I don't know
what you can answer me," she said in a rapid patter. "The twelve hundred
roubles of your pension I consider a sacred obligation to pay you as long as
you live. Though why a sacred obligation, simply a contract; that would be a
great deal more real, wouldn't it? If you like, we'll write it out. Special
arrangements have been made in case of my death. But you are receiving from me
at present lodging, servants, and your maintenance in addition. Reckoning that
in money it would amount to fifteen hundred roubles, wouldn't it? I will add
another three hundred roubles, making three thousand roubles in all. Will that
be enough a year for you? I think that's not too little? In any extreme
emergency I would add something more. And so, take your money, send me back my
servants, and live by yourself where you like in Petersburg, in Moscow, abroad,
or here, only not with me. Do you hear?"

"Only lately those lips dictated to me as imperatively and as suddenly very
different demands," said Stepan Trofimovitch slowly and with sorrowful
distinctness. "I submitted... and danced the Cossack dance to please you. _Oui,
la comparaison peut être permise. C'était comme un petit Cosaque du Don qui
sautait sur sa propre tombe._ Now..."

"Stop, Stepan Trofimovitch, you are horribly long-winded. You didn't dance, but
came to see me in a new tie, new linen, gloves, scented and pomatumed. I assure
you that you were very anxious to get married yourself; it was written on your
face, and I assure you a most unseemly expression it was. If I did not mention
it to you at the time, it was simply out of delicacy. But you wished it, you
wanted to be married, in spite of the abominable things you wrote about me and
your betrothed. Now it's very different. And what has the Cosaque du Don to do
with it, and what tomb do you mean? I don't understand the comparison. On the
contrary, you have only to live. Live as long as you can. I shall be
delighted."

"In an almshouse?"

"In an almshouse? People don't go into almshouses with three thousand roubles a
year. Ah, I remember," she laughed. "Pyotr Stepanovitch did joke about an
almshouse once. Bah, there certainly is a special almshouse, which is worth
considering. It's for persons who are highly respectable; there are colonels
there, and there's positively one general who wants to get into it. If you went
into it with all your money, you would find peace, comfort, servants to wait on
you. There you could occupy yourself with study, and could always make up a
party for cards."

_"Passons."_

_"Passons?"_ Varvara Petrovna winced. "But, if so, that's all. You've been
informed that we shall live henceforward entirely apart."

"And that's all?" he said. "All that's left of twenty years? Our last
farewell?"

"You're awfully fond of these exclamations, Stepan Trofimovitch. It's not at
all the fashion. Nowadays people talk roughly but simply. You keep harping on
our twenty years! Twenty years of mutual vanity, and nothing more. Every letter
you've written me was written not for me but for posterity. You're a stylist,
and not a friend, and friendship is only a splendid word. In reality--a mutual
exchange of sloppiness...."

"Good heavens! How many sayings not your own! Lessons learned by heart! They've
already put their uniform on you too. You, too, are rejoicing; you, too, are
basking in the sunshine. _Chère, chère,_ for what a mess of pottage you have
sold them your freedom!"

"I'm not a parrot, to repeat other people's phrases!" cried Varvara Petrovna,
boiling over. "You may be sure I have stored up many sayings of my own. What
have you been doing for me all these twenty years? You refused me even the
books I ordered for you, though, except for the binder, they would have
remained uncut. What did you give me to read when I asked you during those
first years to be my guide? Always Kapfig, and nothing but Kapfig. You were
jealous of my culture even, and took measures. And all the while every one's
laughing at you. I must confess I always considered you only as a critic. You
are a literary critic and nothing more. When on the way to Petersburg I told
you that I meant to found a journal and to devote my whole life to it, you
looked at me ironically at once, and suddenly became horribly supercilious."

"That was not that, not that.... we were afraid then of persecution...."

"It was just that. And you couldn't have been afraid of persecution in
Petersburg at that time. Do you remember that in February, too, when the news
of the emancipation came, you ran to me in a panic, and demanded that I should
at once give you a written statement that the proposed magazine had nothing to
do with you; that the young people had been coming to see me and not you; that
you were only a tutor who lived in the house, only because he had not yet
received his salary. Isn't that so? Do remember that? You have distinguished
yourself all your life, Stepan Trofimovitch."

"That was only a moment of weakness, a moment when we were alone," he exclaimed
mournfully. "But is it possible, is it possible, to break off everything for
the sake of such petty impressions? Can it be that nothing more has been left
between us after those long years?"

"You are horribly calculating; you keep trying to leave me in your debt. When
you came back from abroad you looked down upon me and wouldn't let me utter a
word, but when I came back myself and talked to you afterwards of my
impressions of the Madonna, you wouldn't hear me, you began smiling
condescendingly into your cravat, as though I were incapable of the same
feelings as you."

"It was not so. It was probably not so. _J'ai oublié!_"

"No; it was so," she answered, "and, what's more, you've nothing to pride
yourself on. That's all nonsense, and one of your fancies. Now, there's no one,
absolutely no one, in ecstasies over the Madonna; no one wastes time over it
except old men who are hopelessly out of date. That's established."

"Established, is it?"

"It's of no use whatever. This jug's of use because one can pour water into it.
This pencil's of use because you can write anything with it. But that woman's
face is inferior to any face in nature. Try drawing an apple, and put a real
apple beside it. Which would you take? You wouldn't make a mistake, I'm sure.
This is what all our theories amount to, now that the first light of free
investigation has dawned upon them."

"Indeed, indeed."

"You laugh ironically. And what used you to say to me about charity? Yet the
enjoyment derived from charity is a haughty and immoral enjoyment. The rich
man's enjoyment in his wealth, his power, and in the comparison of his
importance with the poor. Charity corrupts giver and taker alike; and, what's
more, does not attain its object, as it only increases poverty. Fathers who
don't want to work crowd round the charitable like gamblers round the
gambling-table, hoping for gain, while the pitiful farthings that are flung
them are a hundred times too little. Have you given away much in your life?
Less than a rouble, if you try and think. Try to remember when last you gave
away anything; it'll be two years ago, maybe four. You make an outcry and only
hinder things. Charity ought to be forbidden by law, even in the present state
of society. In the new regime there will be no poor at all."

"Oh, what an eruption of borrowed phrases! So it's come to the new regime
already? Unhappy woman, God help you!"

"Yes; it has, Stepan Trofimovitch. You carefully concealed all these new ideas
from me, though every one's familiar with them nowadays. And you did it simply
out of jealousy, so as to have power over me. So that now even that Yulia is a
hundred miles ahead of me. But now my eyes have been opened. I have defended
you, Stepan Trofimovitch, all I could, but there is no one who does not blame
you."

"Enough!" said he, getting up from his seat. "Enough! And what can I wish you
now, unless it's repentance?"

"Sit still a minute, Stepan Trofimovitch. I have another question to ask you.
You've been told of the invitation to read at the literary matinée. It was
arranged through me. Tell me what you're going to read?"

"Why, about that very Queen of Queens, that ideal of humanity, the Sistine
Madonna, who to your thinking is inferior to a glass or a pencil."

"So you're not taking something historical?'" said Varvara Petrovna in mournful
surprise. "But they won't listen to you. You've got that Madonna on your brain.
You seem bent on putting every one to sleep! Let me assure you, Stepan
Trofimovitch, I am speaking entirely in your own interest. It would be a
different matter if you would take some short but interesting story of mediæval
court life from Spanish history, or, better still, some anecdote, and pad it
out with other anecdotes and witty phrases of your own. There were magnificent
courts then; ladies, you know, poisonings. Karmazinov says it would be strange
if you couldn't read something interesting from Spanish history."

"Karmazinov--that fool who has written himself out--looking for a subject for
me!"

"Karmazinov, that almost imperial intellect. You are too free in your language,
Stepan Trofimovitch."

"Your Karmazinov is a spiteful old woman whose day is over. _Chère, chère,_ how
long have you been so enslaved by them? Oh God!"

"I can't endure him even now for the airs he gives himself. But I do justice to
his intellect. I repeat, I have done my best to defend you as far as I could.
And why do you insist on being absurd and tedious? On the contrary, come on to
the platform with a dignified smile as the representative of the last
generation, and tell them two or three anecdotes in your witty way, as only you
can tell things sometimes. Though you may be an old man now, though you may
belong to a past age, though you may have dropped behind them, in fact, yet
you'll recognise it yourself, with a smile, in your preface, and all will see
that you're an amiable, good-natured, witty relic... in brief, a man of the old
savour, and so far advanced as to be capable of appreciating at their value all
the absurdities of certain ideas which you have hitherto followed. Come, as a
favour to me, I beg you."

"_Chère,_ enough. Don't ask me. I can't. I shall speak of the Madonna, but I
shall raise a storm that will either crush them all or shatter me alone."

"It will certainly be you alone, Stepan Trofimovitch."

"Such is my fate. I will speak of the contemptible slave, of the stinking,
depraved flunkey who will first climb a ladder with scissors in his hands, and
slash to pieces the divine image of the great ideal, in the name of equality,
envy, and... digestion. Let my curse thunder out upon them, and then--then..."

"The madhouse?"

"Perhaps. But in any case, whether I shall be left vanquished or victorious,
that very evening I shall take my bag, my beggar's bag. I shall leave all my
goods and chattels, all your presents, all your pensions and promises of future
benefits, and go forth on foot to end my life a tutor in a merchant's family or
to die somewhere of hunger in a ditch. I have said it. _Alea jacta est._" He
got up again.

"I've been convinced for years," said Varvara Petrovna, getting up with
flashing eyes, "that your only object in life is to put me and my house to
shame by your calumnies! What do you mean by being a tutor in a merchant's
family or dying in a ditch? It's spite, calumny, and nothing more."

"You have always despised me. But I will end like a knight, faithful to my
lady. Your good opinion has always been dearer to me than anything. From this
moment I will take nothing, but will worship you disinterestedly."

"How stupid that is!"

"You have never respected me. I may have had a mass of weaknesses. Yes, I have
sponged on you. I speak the language of nihilism, but sponging has never been
the guiding motive of my action. It has happened so of itself. I don't know
how.... I always imagined there was something higher than meat and drink
between us, and--I've never, never been a scoundrel! And so, to take the open
road, to set things right. I set off late, late autumn out of doors, the mist
lies over the fields, the hoarfrost of old age covers the road before me, and
the wind howls about the approaching grave.... But so forward, forward, on my
new way

'Filled with purest love and fervour,      Faith which my sweet dream did
yield.'

Oh, my dreams. Farewell. Twenty years. _Alea jacta est!_"

His face was wet with a sudden gush of tears. He took his hat.

"I don't understand Latin," said Varvara Petrovna, doing her best to control
herself.

Who knows, perhaps, she too felt like crying. But caprice and indignation once
more got the upper hand.

"I know only one thing, that all this is childish nonsense. You will never be
capable of carrying out your threats, which are a mass of egoism. You will set
off nowhere, to no merchant; you'll end very peaceably on my hands, taking your
pension, and receiving your utterly impossible friends on Tuesdays. Good-bye,
Stepan Trofimovitch."

_"Alea jacta est!"_ He made her a deep bow, and returned home, almost dead with
emotion.

