# PART III - CHAPTER VII. STEPAN TROFIMOVITCH'S LAST WANDERING - I
[Metadata]: # {03.07.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.07.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER VII. STEPAN TROFIMOVITCH'S LAST WANDERING
I
# I
I am persuaded that Stepan Trofimovitch was terribly frightened as he felt the
time fixed for his insane enterprise drawing near. I am convinced that he
suffered dreadfully from terror, especially on the night before he
started--that awful night. Nastasya mentioned afterwards that he had gone to
bed late and fallen asleep. But that proves nothing; men sentenced to death
sleep very soundly, they say, even the night before their execution. Though he
set off by daylight, when a nervous man is always a little more confident (and
the major, Virginsky's relative, used to give up believing in God every morning
when the night was over), yet I am convinced he could never, without horror,
have imagined himself alone on the high road in such a position. No doubt a
certain desperation in his feelings softened at first the terrible sensation of
sudden solitude in which he at once found himself as soon as he had left
Nastasya, and the corner in which he had been warm and snug for twenty years.
But it made no difference; even with the clearest recognition of all the
horrors awaiting him he would have gone out to the high road and walked along
it! There was something proud in the undertaking which allured him in spite of
everything. Oh, he might have accepted Varvara Petrovna's luxurious provision
and have remained living on her charity, "_comme un_ humble dependent." But he
had not accepted her charity and was not remaining! And here he was leaving her
of himself, and holding aloft the "standard of a great idea, and going to die
for it on the open road." That is how he must have been feeling; that's how his
action must have appeared to him.

Another question presented itself to me more than once. Why did he run away,
that is, literally run away on foot, rather than simply drive away? I put it
down at first to the impracticability of fifty years and the fantastic bent of
his mind under the influence of strong emotion. I imagined that the thought of
posting tickets and horses (even if they had bells) would have seemed too
simple and prosaic to him; a pilgrimage, on the other hand, even under an
umbrella, was ever so much more picturesque and in character with love and
resentment. But now that everything is over, I am inclined to think that it all
came about in a much simpler way. To begin with, he was afraid to hire horses
because Varvara Petrovna might have heard of it and prevented him from going by
force; which she certainly would have done, and he certainly would have given
in, and then farewell to the great idea forever. Besides, to take tickets for
anywhere he must have known at least where he was going. But to think about
that was the greatest agony to him at that moment; he was utterly unable to fix
upon a place. For if he had to fix on any particular town his enterprise would
at once have seemed in his own eyes absurd and impossible; he felt that very
strongly. What should he do in that particular town rather than in any other?
Look out for _ce marchand_? But what _marchand_? At that point his second and
most terrible question cropped up. In reality there was nothing he dreaded more
than _ce marchand_, whom he had rushed off to seek so recklessly, though, of
course, he was terribly afraid of finding him. No, better simply the high road,
better simply to set off for it, and walk along it and to think of nothing so
long as he could put off thinking. The high road is something very very long,
of which one cannot see the end--like human life, like human dreams. There is
an idea in the open road, but what sort of idea is there in travelling with
posting tickets? Posting tickets mean an end to ideas. _Vive la grande route_
and then as God wills.

After the sudden and unexpected interview with Liza which I have described, he
rushed on, more lost in forgetfulness than ever. The high road passed half a
mile from Skvoreshniki and, strange to say, he was not at first aware that he
was on it. Logical reasoning or even distinct consciousness was unbearable to
him at this moment. A fine rain kept drizzling, ceasing, and drizzling again;
but he did not even notice the rain. He did not even notice either how he threw
his bag over his shoulder, nor how much more comfortably he walked with it so.
He must have walked like that for nearly a mile or so when he suddenly stood
still and looked round. The old road, black, marked with wheel-ruts and planted
with willows on each side, ran before him like an endless thread; on the right
hand were bare plains from which the harvest had long ago been carried; on the
left there were bushes and in the distance beyond them a copse.

And far, far away a scarcely perceptible line of the railway, running aslant,
and on it the smoke of a train, but no sound was heard. Stepan Trofimovitch
felt a little timid, but only for a moment. He heaved a vague sigh, put down
his bag beside a willow, and sat down to rest. As he moved to sit down he was
conscious of being chilly and wrapped himself in his rug; noticing at the same
time that it was raining, he put up his umbrella. He sat like that for some
time, moving his lips from time to time and firmly grasping the umbrella
handle. Images of all sorts passed in feverish procession before him, rapidly
succeeding one another in his mind.

"Lise, Lise," he thought, "and with her _ce Maurice_.... Strange people.... But
what was the strange fire, and what were they talking about, and who were
murdered? I fancy Nastasya has not found out yet and is still waiting for me
with my coffee... cards? Did I really lose men at cards? H'm! Among us in
Russia in the times of serfdom, so called.... My God, yes--Fedka!"

He started all over with terror and looked about him. "What if that Fedka is in
hiding somewhere behind the bushes? They say he has a regular band of robbers
here on the high road. Oh, mercy, I... I'll tell him the whole truth then, that
I was to blame... and that I've been miserable about him _for ten years_. More
miserable than he was as a soldier, and... I'll give him my purse. H'm! _J'ai
en tout quarante roubles; il prendra les roubles et il me tuera tout de même._"

In his panic he for some reason shut up the umbrella and laid it down beside
him. A cart came into sight on the high road in the distance coming from the
town.

"_Grace à Dieu_, that's a cart and it's coming at a walking pace; that can't be
dangerous. The wretched little horses here... I always said that breed... It
was Pyotr Ilyitch though, he talked at the club about horse-breeding and I
trumped him, _et puis_... but what's that behind?... I believe there's a woman
in the cart. A peasant and a woman, _cela commence à être rassurant._ The woman
behind and the man in front-- _c'est très rassurant._ There's a cow behind the
cart tied by the horns, _c'est rassurant au plus haut degré._"

The cart reached him; it was a fairly solid peasant cart. The woman was sitting
on a tightly stuffed sack and the man on the front of the cart with his legs
hanging over towards Stepan Trofimovitch. A red cow was, in fact, shambling
behind, tied by the horns to the cart. The man and the woman gazed open-eyed at
Stepan Trofimovitch, and Stepan Trofimovitch gazed back at them with equal
wonder, but after he had let them pass twenty paces, he got up hurriedly all of
a sudden and walked after them. In the proximity of the cart it was natural
that he should feel safer, but when he had overtaken it he became oblivious of
everything again and sank back into his disconnected thoughts and fancies. He
stepped along with no suspicion, of course, that for the two peasants he was at
that instant the most mysterious and interesting object that one could meet on
the high road.

"What sort may you be, pray, if it's not uncivil to ask?" the woman could not
resist asking at last when Stepan Trofimovitch glanced absent-mindedly at her.
She was a woman of about seven and twenty, sturdily built, with black eyebrows,
rosy cheeks, and a friendly smile on her red lips, between which gleamed white
even teeth.

"You... you are addressing me?" muttered Stepan Trofimovitch with mournful
wonder.

"A merchant, for sure," the peasant observed confidently. He was a well-grown
man of forty with a broad and intelligent face, framed in a reddish beard.

"No, I am not exactly a merchant, I... I... _moi c'est autre chose._" Stepan
Trofimovitch parried the question somehow, and to be on the safe side he
dropped back a little from the cart, so that he was walking on a level with the
cow.

"Must be a gentleman," the man decided, hearing words not Russian, and he gave
a tug at the horse.

"That's what set us wondering. You are out for a walk seemingly?" the woman
asked inquisitively again.

"You... you ask me?"

"Foreigners come from other parts sometimes by the train; your boots don't seem
to be from hereabouts...."

"They are army boots," the man put in complacently and significantly.

"No, I am not precisely in the army, I..."

"What an inquisitive woman!" Stepan Trofimovitch mused with vexation. "And how
they stare at me... _mais enfin_. In fact, it's strange that I feel, as it
were, conscience-stricken before them, and yet I've done them no harm."

The woman was whispering to the man.

"If it's no offence, we'd give you a lift if so be it's agreeable."

Stepan Trofimovitch suddenly roused himself.

"Yes, yes, my friends, I accept it with pleasure, for I'm very tired; but how
am I to get in?"

"How wonderful it is," he thought to himself, "that I've been walking so long
beside that cow and it never entered my head to ask them for a lift. This 'real
life' has something very original about it."

But the peasant had not, however, pulled up the horse.

"But where are you bound for?" he asked with some mistrustfulness.

Stepan Trofimovitch did not understand him at once.

"To Hatovo, I suppose?"

"Hatov? No, not to Hatov's exactly... And I don't know him though I've heard of
him."

"The village of Hatovo, the village, seven miles from here."

"A village? _C'est charmant,_ to be sure I've heard of it...."

Stepan Trofimovitch was still walking, they had not yet taken him into the
cart. A guess that was a stroke of genius flashed through his mind.

"You think perhaps that I am... I've got a passport and I am a professor, that
is, if you like, a teacher... but a head teacher. I am a head teacher. _Oui,
c'est comme ça qu'on peut traduire._ I should be very glad of a lift and I'll
buy you... I'll buy you a quart of vodka for it."

"It'll be half a rouble, sir; it's a bad road."

"Or it wouldn't be fair to ourselves," put in the woman.

"Half a rouble? Very good then, half a rouble. _C'est encore mieux; j'ai en
tout quarante roubles mais_..."

The peasant stopped the horse and by their united efforts Stepan Trofimovitch
was dragged into the cart, and seated on the sack by the woman. He was still
pursued by the same whirl of ideas. Sometimes he was aware himself that he was
terribly absent-minded, and that he was not thinking of what he ought to be
thinking of and wondered at it. This consciousness of abnormal weakness of mind
became at moments very painful and even humiliating to him.

"How... how is this you've got a cow behind?" he suddenly asked the woman.

"What do you mean, sir, as though you'd never seen one," laughed the woman.

"We bought it in the town," the peasant put in. "Our cattle died last spring...
the plague. All the beasts have died round us, all of them. There aren't half
of them left, it's heartbreaking."

And again he lashed the horse, which had got stuck in a rut.

"Yes, that does happen among you in Russia... in general we Russians... Well,
yes, it happens," Stepan Trofimovitch broke off.

"If you are a teacher, what are you going to Hatovo for? Maybe you are going on
farther."

"I... I'm not going farther precisely.... _C'est-à-dire,_ I'm going to a
merchant's."

"To Spasov, I suppose?"

"Yes, yes, to Spasov. But that's no matter."

"If you are going to Spasov and on foot, it will take you a week in your
boots," laughed the woman.

"I dare say, I dare say, no matter, _mes amis_, no matter." Stepan Trofimovitch
cut her short impatiently.

"Awfully inquisitive people; but the woman speaks better than he does, and I
notice that since February 19,* their language has altered a little, and... and
what business is it of mine whether I'm going to Spasov or not? Besides, I'll
pay them, so why do they pester me."

*February 19, 1861, the day of the Emancipation of the Serfs, is
meant.--Translator's note.

"If you are going to Spasov, you must take the steamer," the peasant persisted.

"That's true indeed," the woman put in with animation, "for if you drive along
the bank it's twenty-five miles out of the way."

"Thirty-five."

"You'll just catch the steamer at Ustyevo at two o'clock tomorrow," the woman
decided finally. But Stepan Trofimovitch was obstinately silent. His
questioners, too, sank into silence. The peasant tugged at his horse at rare
intervals; the peasant woman exchanged brief remarks with him. Stepan
Trofimovitch fell into a doze. He was tremendously surprised when the woman,
laughing, gave him a poke and he found himself in a rather large village at the
door of a cottage with three windows.

"You've had a nap, sir?"

"What is it? Where am I? Ah, yes! Well... never mind," sighed Stepan
Trofimovitch, and he got out of the cart.

He looked about him mournfully; the village scene seemed strange to him and
somehow terribly remote.

"And the half-rouble, I was forgetting it!" he said to the peasant, turning to
him with an excessively hurried gesture; he was evidently by now afraid to part
from them.

"We'll settle indoors, walk in," the peasant invited him.

"It's comfortable inside," the woman said reassuringly.

Stepan Trofimovitch mounted the shaky steps. "How can it be?" he murmured in
profound and apprehensive perplexity. He went into the cottage, however. _"Elle
l'a voulu"_ he felt a stab at his heart and again he became oblivious of
everything, even of the fact that he had gone into the cottage.

It was a light and fairly clean peasant's cottage, with three windows and two
rooms; not exactly an inn, but a cottage at which people who knew the place
were accustomed to stop on their way through the village. Stepan Trofimovitch,
quite unembarrassed, went to the foremost corner; forgot to greet anyone, sat
down and sank into thought. Meanwhile a sensation of warmth, extremely
agreeable after three hours of travelling in the damp, was suddenly diffused
throughout his person. Even the slight shivers that spasmodically ran down his
spine--such as always occur in particularly nervous people when they are
feverish and have suddenly come into a warm room from the cold--became all at
once strangely agreeable. He raised his head and the delicious fragrance of the
hot pancakes with which the woman of the house was busy at the stove tickled
his nostrils. With a childlike smile he leaned towards the woman and suddenly
said:

"What's that? Are they pancakes? _Mais... c'est charmant._"

"Would you like some, sir?" the woman politely offered him at once.

"I should like some, I certainly should, and... may I ask you for some tea
too," said Stepan Trofimovitch, reviving.

"Get the samovar? With the greatest pleasure."

On a large plate with a big blue pattern on it were served the
pancakes--regular peasant pancakes, thin, made half of wheat, covered with
fresh hot butter, most delicious pancakes. Stepan Trofimovitch tasted them with
relish.

"How rich they are and how good! And if one could only have _un doigt d'eau de
vie_."

"It's a drop of vodka you would like, sir, isn't it?"

"Just so, just so, a little, _un tout petit rien_."

"Five farthings' worth, I suppose?"

"Five, yes, five, five, five, _un tout petit rien_," Stepan Trofimovitch
assented with a blissful smile.

Ask a peasant to do anything for you, and if he can, and will, he will serve
you with care and friendliness; but ask him to fetch you vodka--and his
habitual serenity and friendliness will pass at once into a sort of joyful
haste and alacrity; he will be as keen in your interest as though you were one
of his family. The peasant who fetches vodka--even though you are going to
drink it and not he and he knows that beforehand--seems, as it were, to be
enjoying part of your future gratification. Within three minutes (the tavern
was only two paces away), a bottle and a large greenish wineglass were set on
the table before Stepan Trofimovitch.

"Is that all for me!" He was extremely surprised. "I've always had vodka but I
never knew you could get so much for five farthings."

He filled the wineglass, got up and with a certain solemnity crossed the room
to the other corner where his fellow-traveller, the black-browed peasant woman,
who had shared the sack with him and bothered him with her questions, had
ensconced herself. The woman was taken aback, and began to decline, but after
having said all that was prescribed by politeness, she stood up and drank it
decorously in three sips, as women do, and, with an expression of intense
suffering on her face, gave back the wineglass and bowed to Stepan
Trofimovitch. He returned the bow with dignity and returned to the table with
an expression of positive pride on his countenance.

All this was done on the inspiration of the moment: a second before he had no
idea that he would go and treat the peasant woman.

"I know how to get on with peasants to perfection, to perfection, and I've
always told them so," he thought complacently, pouring out the rest of the
vodka; though there was less than a glass left, it warmed and revived him, and
even went a little to his head.

_"Je suis malade tout à fait, mais ce n'est pas trop mauvais d'être malade."_

"Would you care to purchase?" a gentle feminine voice asked close by him.

He raised his eyes and to his surprise saw a lady--_une dame et elle en avait
l'air,_ somewhat over thirty, very modest in appearance, dressed not like a
peasant, in a dark gown with a grey shawl on her shoulders. There was something
very kindly in her face which attracted Stepan Trofimovitch immediately. She
had only just come back to the cottage, where her things had been left on a
bench close by the place where Stepan Trofimovitch had seated himself. Among
them was a portfolio, at which he remembered he had looked with curiosity on
going in, and a pack, not very large, of American leather. From this pack she
took out two nicely bound books with a cross engraved on the cover, and offered
them to Stepan Trofimovitch.

"_Et... mais je crois que c'est l'Evangile..._ with the greatest pleasure....
Ah, now I understand.... _Vous êtes ce qu'on appelle_ a gospel-woman; I've read
more than once.... Half a rouble?"

"Thirty-five kopecks," answered the gospel-woman. "With the greatest pleasure.
_Je n'ai rien contre l'Evangile,_ and I've been wanting to re-read it for a
long time...."

The idea occurred to him at the moment that he had not read the gospel for
thirty years at least, and at most had recalled some passages of it, seven
years before, when reading Renan's "Vie de Jésus." As he had no small change he
pulled out his four ten-rouble notes--all that he had. The woman of the house
undertook to get change, and only then he noticed, looking round, that a good
many people had come into the cottage, and that they had all been watching him
for some time past, and seemed to be talking about him. They were talking too
of the fire in the town, especially the owner of the cart who had only just
returned from the town with the cow. They talked of arson, of the Shpigulin
men.

"He said nothing to me about the fire when he brought me along, although he
talked of everything," struck Stepan Trofimovitch for some reason.

"Master, Stepan Trofimovitch, sir, is it you I see? Well, I never should have
thought it!... Don't you know me?" exclaimed a middle-aged man who looked like
an old-fashioned house-serf, wearing no beard and dressed in an overcoat with a
wide turn-down collar. Stepan Trofimovitch was alarmed at hearing his own name.

"Excuse me," he muttered, "I don't quite remember you."

"You don't remember me. I am Anisim, Anisim Ivanov. I used to be in the service
of the late Mr. Gaganov, and many's the time I've seen you, sir, with Varvara
Petrovna at the late Avdotya Sergyevna's. I used to go to you with books from
her, and twice I brought you Petersburg sweets from her...."

"Why, yes, I remember you, Anisim," said Stepan Trofimovitch, smiling. "Do you
live here?"

"I live near Spasov, close to the V---- Monastery, in the service of Marta
Sergyevna, Avdotya Sergyevna's sister. Perhaps your honour remembers her; she
broke her leg falling out of her carriage on her way to a ball. Now her honour
lives near the monastery, and I am in her service. And now as your honour sees,
I am on my way to the town to see my kinsfolk."

"Quite so, quite so."

"I felt so pleased when I saw you, you used to be so kind to me," Anisim smiled
delightedly. "But where are you travelling to, sir, all by yourself as it
seems.... You've never been a journey alone, I fancy?"

Stepan Trofimovitch looked at him in alarm.

"You are going, maybe, to our parts, to Spasov?"

"Yes, I am going to Spasov. _Il me semble que tout le monde va à Spassof._"

"You don't say it's to Fyodor Matveyevitch's? They will be pleased to see you.
He had such a respect for you in old days; he often speaks of you now."

"Yes, yes, to Fyodor Matveyevitch's."

"To be sure, to be sure. The peasants here are wondering; they make out they
met you, sir, walking on the high road. They are a foolish lot."

"I... I... Yes, you know, Anisim, I made a wager, you know, like an Englishman,
that I would go on foot and I..."

The perspiration came out on his forehead.

"To be sure, to be sure." Anisim listened with merciless curiosity. But Stepan
Trofimovitch could bear it no longer. He was so disconcerted that he was on the
point of getting up and going out of the cottage. But the samovar was brought
in, and at the same moment the gospel-woman, who had been out of the room,
returned. With the air of a man clutching at a straw he turned to her and
offered her tea. Anisim submitted and walked away.

The peasants certainly had begun to feel perplexed: "What sort of person is he?
He was found walking on the high road, he says he is a teacher, he is dressed
like a foreigner, and has no more sense than a little child; he answers queerly
as though he had run away from someone, and he's got money!" An idea was
beginning to gain ground that information must be given to the authorities,
"especially as things weren't quite right in the town." But Anisim set all that
right in a minute. Going into the passage he explained to every one who cared
to listen that Stepan Trofimovitch was not exactly a teacher but "a very
learned man and busy with very learned studies, and was a landowner of the
district himself, and had been living for twenty-two years with her excellency,
the general's widow, the stout Madame Stavrogin, and was by way of being the
most important person in her house, and was held in the greatest respect by
every one in the town. He used to lose by fifties and hundreds in an evening at
the club of the nobility, and in rank he was a councillor, which was equal to a
lieutenant-colonel in the army, which was next door to being a colonel. As for
his having money, he had so much from the stout Madame Stavrogin that there was
no reckoning it"--and so on and so on.

_"Mais c'est une dame et très comme il faut,"_ thought Stepan Trofimovitch, as
he recovered from Anisim's attack, gazing with agreeable curiosity at his
neighbour, the gospel pedlar, who was, however, drinking the tea from a saucer
and nibbling at a piece of sugar. "_Ce petit morceau de sucre, ce n'est
rien...._ There is something noble and independent about her, and at the same
time--gentle. _Le comme il faut tout pur,_ but rather in a different style."

He soon learned from her that her name was Sofya Matveyevna Ulitin and she
lived at K----, that she had a sister there, a widow; that she was a widow too,
and that her husband, who was a sub-lieutenant risen from the ranks, had been
killed at Sevastopol.

"But you are still so young, _vous n'avez pas trente ans_."

"Thirty-four," said Sofya Matveyevna, smiling.

"What, you understand French?"

"A little. I lived for four years after that in a gentleman's family, and there
I picked it up from the children."

She told him that being left a widow at eighteen she was for some time in
Sevastopol as a nurse, and had afterwards lived in various places, and now she
travelled about selling the gospel.

"_Mais, mon Dieu,_ wasn't it you who had a strange adventure in our town, a
very strange adventure?"

She flushed; it turned out that it had been she.

_"Ces vauriens, ces malheureux,"_ he began in a voice quivering with
indignation; miserable and hateful recollections stirred painfully in his
heart. For a minute he seemed to sink into oblivion.

"Bah, but she's gone away again," he thought, with a start, noticing that she
was not by his side. "She keeps going out and is busy about something; I notice
that she seems upset too.... _Bah, je deviens egoiste!_"

He raised his eyes and saw Anisim again, but this time in the most menacing
surroundings. The whole cottage was full of peasants, and it was evidently
Anisim who had brought them all in. Among them were the master of the house,
and the peasant with the cow, two other peasants (they turned out to be
cab-drivers), another little man, half drunk, dressed like a peasant but
clean-shaven, who seemed like a townsman ruined by drink and talked more than
any of them. And they were all discussing him, Stepan Trofimovitch. The peasant
with the cow insisted on his point that to go round by the lake would be
thirty-five miles out of the way, and that he certainly must go by steamer. The
half-drunken man and the man of the house warmly retorted:

"Seeing that, though of course it will be nearer for his honour on the steamer
over the lake; that's true enough, but maybe according to present arrangements
the steamer doesn't go there, brother."

"It does go, it does, it will go for another week," cried Anisim, more excited
than any of them.

"That's true enough, but it doesn't arrive punctually, seeing it's late in the
season, and sometimes it'll stay three days together at Ustyevo."

"It'll be there to-morrow at two o'clock punctually. You'll be at Spasov
punctually by the evening," cried Anisim, eager to do his best for Stepan
Trofimovitch.

_"Mais qu'est-ce qu'il a cet homme,"_ thought Stepan Trofimovitch, trembling
and waiting in terror for what was in store for him.

The cab-drivers, too, came forward and began bargaining with him; they asked
three roubles to Ustyevo. The others shouted that that was not too much, that
that was the fare, and that they had been driving from here to Ustyevo all the
summer for that fare.

"But... it's nice here too.... And I don't want..." Stepan Trofimovitch mumbled
in protest.

"Nice it is, sir, you are right there, it's wonderfully nice at Spasov now and
Fyodor Matveyevitch will be so pleased to see you."

"_Mon Dieu, mes amis,_ all this is such a surprise to me."

At last Sofya Matveyevna came back. But she sat down on the bench looking
dejected and mournful.

"I can't get to Spasov!" she said to the woman of the cottage.

"Why, you are bound to Spasov, too, then?" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, starting.

It appeared that a lady had the day before told her to wait at Hatovo and had
promised to take her to Spasov, and now this lady had not turned up after all.

"What am I to do now?" repeated Sofya Matveyevna.

"_Mais, ma chère et nouvelle amie,_ I can take you just as well as the lady to
that village, whatever it is, to which I've hired horses, and to-morrow--well,
to-morrow, we'll go on together to Spasov."

"Why, are you going to Spasov too?"

"_Mais que faire, et je suis enchanté!_ I shall take you with the greatest
pleasure; you see they want to take me, I've engaged them already. Which of you
did I engage?" Stepan Trofimovitch suddenly felt an intense desire to go to
Spasov.

Within a quarter of an hour they were getting into a covered trap, he very
lively and quite satisfied, she with her pack beside him, with a grateful smile
on her face. Anisim helped them in.

"A good journey to you, sir," said he, bustling officiously round the trap, "it
has been a treat to see you."

"Good-bye, good-bye, my friend, good-bye."

"You'll see Fyodor Matveyevitch, sir..."

"Yes, my friend, yes... Fyodor Petrovitch... only good-bye."

