# PART III - CHAPTER IV. THE LAST RESOLUTION - I
[Metadata]: # {03.04.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {03.04.01.01}
THAT MORNING MANY people saw Pyotr Stepanovitch. All who saw him remembered
that he was in a particularly excited state. At two o'clock he went to see
Gaganov, who had arrived from the country only the day before, and whose house
was full of visitors hotly discussing the events of the previous day. Pyotr
Stepanovitch talked more than anyone and made them listen to him. He was always
considered among us as a "chatterbox of a student with a screw loose," but now
he talked of Yulia Mihailovna, and in the general excitement the theme was an
enthralling one. As one who had recently been her intimate and confidential
friend, he disclosed many new and unexpected details concerning her;
incidentally (and of course unguardedly) he repeated some of her own remarks
about persons known to all in the town, and thereby piqued their vanity. He
dropped it all in a vague and rambling way, like a man free from guile driven
by his sense of honour to the painful necessity of clearing up a perfect
mountain of misunderstandings, and so simple-hearted that he hardly knew where
to begin and where to leave off. He let slip in a rather unguarded way, too,
that Yulia Mihailovna knew the whole secret of Stavrogin and that she had been
at the bottom of the whole intrigue. She had taken him in too, for he, Pyotr
Stepanovitch, had also been in love with this unhappy Liza, yet he had been so
hoodwinked that he had _almost_ taken her to Stavrogin himself in the carriage.
"Yes, yes, it's all very well for you to laugh, gentlemen, but if only I'd
known, if I'd known how it would end!" he concluded. To various excited
inquiries about Stavrogin he bluntly replied that in his opinion the
catastrophe to the Lebyadkins was a pure coincidence, and that it was all
Lebyadkin's own fault for displaying his money. He explained this particularly
well. One of his listeners observed that it was no good his "pretending"; that
he had eaten and drunk and almost slept at Yulia Mihailovna's, yet now he was
the first to blacken her character, and that this was by no means such a fine
thing to do as he supposed. But Pyotr Stepanovitch immediately defended
himself.

"I ate and drank there not because I had no money, and it's not my fault that I
was invited there. Allow me to judge for myself how far I need to be grateful
for that."

The general impression was in his favour. "He may be rather absurd, and of
course he is a nonsensical fellow, yet still he is not responsible for Yulia
Mihailovna's foolishness. On the contrary, it appears that he tried to stop
her."

About two o'clock the news suddenly came that Stavrogin, about whom there was
so much talk, had suddenly left for Petersburg by the midday train. This
interested people immensely; many of them frowned. Pyotr Stepanovitch was so
much struck that I was told he turned quite pale and cried out strangely, "Why,
how could they have let him go?" He hurried away from Gaganov's forthwith, yet
he was seen in two or three other houses.

Towards dusk he succeeded in getting in to see Yulia Mihailovna though he had
the greatest pains to do so, as she had absolutely refused to see him. I heard
of this from the lady herself only three weeks afterwards, just before her
departure for Petersburg. She gave me no details, but observed with a shudder
that "he had on that occasion astounded her beyond all belief." I imagine that
all he did was to terrify her by threatening to charge her with being an
accomplice if she "said anything." The necessity for this intimidation arose
from his plans at the moment, of which she, of course, knew nothing; and only
later, five days afterwards, she guessed why he had been so doubtful of her
reticence and so afraid of a new outburst of indignation on her part.

Between seven and eight o'clock, when it was dark, all the five members of the
quintet met together at Ensign Erkel's lodgings in a little crooked house at
the end of the town. The meeting had been fixed by Pyotr Stepanovitch himself,
but he was unpardonably late, and the members waited over an hour for him. This
Ensign Erkel was that young officer who had sat the whole evening at
Virginsky's with a pencil in his hand and a notebook before him. He had not
long been in the town; he lodged alone with two old women, sisters, in a
secluded by-street and was shortly to leave the town; a meeting at his house
was less likely to attract notice than anywhere. This strange boy was
distinguished by extreme taciturnity: he was capable of sitting for a dozen
evenings in succession in noisy company, with the most extraordinary
conversation going on around him, without uttering a word, though he listened
with extreme attention, watching the speakers with his childlike eyes. His face
was very pretty and even had a certain look of cleverness. He did not belong to
the quintet; it was supposed that he had some special job of a purely practical
character. It is known now that he had nothing of the sort and probably did not
understand his position himself. It was simply that he was filled with
hero-worship for Pyotr Stepanovitch, whom he had only lately met. If he had met
a monster of iniquity who had incited him to found a band of brigands on the
pretext of some romantic and socialistic object, and as a test had bidden him
rob and murder the first peasant he met, he would certainly have obeyed and
done it. He had an invalid mother to whom he sent half of his scanty pay--and
how she must have kissed that poor little flaxen head, how she must have
trembled and prayed over it! I go into these details about him because I feel
very sorry for him.

"Our fellows" were excited. The events of the previous night had made a great
impression on them, and I fancy they were in a panic. The simple disorderliness
in which they had so zealously and systematically taken part had ended in a way
they had not expected. The fire in the night, the murder of the Lebyadkins, the
savage brutality of the crowd with Liza, had been a series of surprises which
they had not anticipated in their programme. They hotly accused the hand that
had guided them of despotism and duplicity. In fact, while they were waiting
for Pyotr Stepanovitch they worked each other up to such a point that they
resolved again to ask him for a definite explanation, and if he evaded again,
as he had done before, to dissolve the quintet and to found instead a new
secret society "for the propaganda of ideas" and on their own initiative on the
basis of democracy and equality. Liputin, Shigalov, and the authority on the
peasantry supported this plan; Lyamshin said nothing, though he looked
approving. Virginsky hesitated and wanted to hear Pyotr Stepanovitch first. It
was decided to hear Pyotr Stepanovitch, but still he did not come; such
casualness added fuel to the flames. Erkel was absolutely silent and did
nothing but order the tea, which he brought from his landladies in glasses on a
tray, not bringing in the samovar nor allowing the servant to enter.

Pyotr Stepanovitch did not turn up till half-past eight. With rapid steps he
went up to the circular table before the sofa round which the company were
seated; he kept his cap in his hand and refused tea. He looked angry, severe,
and supercilious. He must have observed at once from their faces that they were
"mutinous."

"Before I open my mouth, you've got something hidden; out with it."

Liputin began "in the name of all," and declared in a voice quivering with
resentment "that if things were going on like that they might as well blow
their brains out." Oh, they were not at all afraid to blow their brains out,
they were quite ready to, in fact, but only to serve the common cause (a
general movement of approbation). So he must be more open with them so that
they might always know beforehand, "or else what would things be coming to?"
(Again a stir and some guttural sounds.) To behave like this was humiliating
and dangerous. "We don't say so because we are afraid, but if one acts and the
rest are only pawns, then one would blunder and all would be lost."
(Exclamations. "Yes, yes." General approval.)

"Damn it all, what do you want?"

"What connection is there between the common cause and the petty intrigues of
Mr. Stavrogin?" cried Liputin, boiling over. "Suppose he is in some mysterious
relation to the centre, if that legendary centre really exists at all, it's no
concern of ours. And meantime a murder has been committed, the police have been
roused; if they follow the thread they may find what it starts from."

"If Stavrogin and you are caught, we shall be caught too," added the authority
on the peasantry.

"And to no good purpose for the common cause," Virginsky concluded
despondently.

"What nonsense! The murder is a chance crime; it was committed by Fedka for the
sake of robbery."

"H'm! Strange coincidence, though," said Liputin, wriggling.

"And if you will have it, it's all through you."

"Through us?"

"In the first place, you, Liputin, had a share in the intrigue yourself; and
the second chief point is, you were ordered to get Lebyadkin away and given
money to do it; and what did you do? If you'd got him away nothing would have
happened."

"But wasn't it you yourself who suggested the idea that it would be a good
thing to set him on to read his verses?"

"An idea is not a command. The command was to get him away."

"Command! Rather a queer word.... On the contrary, your orders were to delay
sending him off."

"You made a mistake and showed your foolishness and self-will. The murder was
the work of Fedka, and he carried it out alone for the sake of robbery. You
heard the gossip and believed it. You were scared. Stavrogin is not such a
fool, and the proof of that is he left the town at twelve o'clock after an
interview with the vice-governor; if there were anything in it they would not
let him go to Petersburg in broad daylight."

"But we are not making out that Mr. Stavrogin committed the murder himself,"
Liputin rejoined spitefully and unceremoniously. "He may have known nothing
about it, like me; and you know very well that I knew nothing about it, though
I am mixed up in it like mutton in a hash."

"Whom are you accusing?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, looking at him darkly.

"Those whose interest it is to burn down towns."

"You make matters worse by wriggling out of it. However, won't you read this
and pass it to the others, simply as a fact of interest?"

He pulled out of his pocket Lebyadkin's anonymous letter to Lembke and handed
it to Liputin. The latter read it, was evidently surprised, and passed it
thoughtfully to his neighbour; the letter quickly went the round.

"Is that really Lebyadkin's handwriting?" observed Shigalov.

"It is," answered Liputin and Tolkatchenko (the authority on the peasantry).

"I simply brought it as a fact of interest and because I knew you were so
sentimental over Lebyadkin," repeated Pyotr Stepanovitch, taking the letter
back. "So it turns out, gentlemen, that a stray Fedka relieves us quite by
chance of a dangerous man. That's what chance does sometimes! It's instructive,
isn't it?"

The members exchanged rapid glances.

"And now, gentlemen, it's my turn to ask questions," said Pyotr Stepanovitch,
assuming an air of dignity. "Let me know what business you had to set fire to
the town without permission."

"What's this! We, we set fire to the town? That is laying the blame on others!"
they exclaimed.

"I quite understand that you carried the game too far," Pyotr Stepanovitch
persisted stubbornly, "but it's not a matter of petty scandals with Yulia
Mihailovna. I've brought you here gentlemen, to explain to you the greatness of
the danger you have so stupidly incurred, which is a menace to much besides
yourselves."

"Excuse me, we, on the contrary, were intending just now to point out to you
the greatness of the despotism and unfairness you have shown in taking such a
serious and also strange step without consulting the members," Virginsky, who
had been hitherto silent, protested, almost with indignation.

"And so you deny it? But I maintain that you set fire to the town, you and none
but you. Gentlemen, don't tell lies! I have good evidence. By your rashness you
exposed the common cause to danger. You are only one knot in an endless network
of knots--and your duty is blind obedience to the centre. Yet three men of you
incited the Shpigulin men to set fire to the town without the least instruction
to do so, and the fire has taken place."

"What three? What three of us?"

"The day before yesterday, at three o'clock in the night, you, Tolkatchenko,
were inciting Fomka Zavyalov at the 'Forget-me-not.'"

"Upon my word!" cried the latter, jumping up, "I scarcely said a word to him,
and what I did say was without intention, simply because he had been flogged
that morning. And I dropped it at once; I saw he was too drunk. If you had not
referred to it I should not have thought of it again. A word could not set the
place on fire."

"You are like a man who should be surprised that a tiny spark could blow a
whole powder magazine into the air."

"I spoke in a whisper in his ear, in a corner; how could you have heard of it?"

Tolkatchenko reflected suddenly.

"I was sitting there under the table. Don't disturb yourselves, gentlemen; I
know every step you take. You smile sarcastically, Mr. Liputin? But I know, for
instance, that you pinched your wife black and blue at midnight, three days
ago, in your bedroom as you were going to bed."

Liputin's mouth fell open and he turned pale. (It was afterwards found out that
he knew of this exploit of Liputin's from Agafya, Liputin's servant, whom he
had paid from the beginning to spy on him; this only came out later.)

"May I state a fact?" said Shigalov, getting up.

"State it."

Shigalov sat down and pulled himself together.

"So far as I understand--and it's impossible not to understand it--you yourself
at first and a second time later, drew with great eloquence, but too
theoretically, a picture of Russia covered with an endless network of knots.
Each of these centres of activity, proselytising and ramifying endlessly, aims
by systematic denunciation to injure the prestige of local authority, to reduce
the villages to confusion, to spread cynicism and scandals, together with
complete disbelief in everything and an eagerness for something better, and
finally, by means of fires, as a pre-eminently national method, to reduce the
country at a given moment, if need be, to desperation. Are those your words
which I tried to remember accurately? Is that the programme you gave us as the
authorised representative of the central committee, which is to this day
utterly unknown to us and almost like a myth?"

"It's correct, only you are very tedious."

"Every one has a right to express himself in his own way. Giving us to
understand that the separate knots of the general network already covering
Russia number by now several hundred, and propounding the theory that if every
one does his work successfully, all Russia at a given moment, at a signal..."

"Ah, damn it all, I have enough to do without you!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch,
twisting in his chair.

"Very well, I'll cut it short and I'll end simply by asking if we've seen the
disorderly scenes, we've seen the discontent of the people, we've seen and
taken part in the downfall of local administration, and finally, we've seen
with our own eyes the town on fire? What do you find amiss? Isn't that your
programme? What can you blame us for?"

"Acting on your own initiative!" Pyotr Stepanovitch cried furiously. "While I
am here you ought not to have dared to act without my permission. Enough. We
are on the eve of betrayal, and perhaps to-morrow or to-night you'll be seized.
So there. I have authentic information."

At this all were agape with astonishment.

"You will be arrested not only as the instigators of the fire, but as a
quintet. The traitor knows the whole secret of the network. So you see what a
mess you've made of it!"

"Stavrogin, no doubt," cried Liputin.

"What... why Stavrogin?" Pyotr Stepanovitch seemed suddenly taken aback. "Hang
it all," he cried, pulling himself together at once, "it's Shatov! I believe
you all know now that Shatov in his time was one of the society. I must tell
you that, watching him through persons he does not suspect, I found out to my
amazement that he knows all about the organisation of the network and...
everything, in fact. To save himself from being charged with having formerly
belonged, he will give information against all. He has been hesitating up till
now and I have spared him. Your fire has decided him: he is shaken and will
hesitate no longer. To-morrow we shall be arrested as incendiaries and
political offenders."

"Is it true? How does Shatov know?" The excitement was indescribable.

"It's all perfectly true. I have no right to reveal the source from which I
learnt it or how I discovered it, but I tell you what I can do for you
meanwhile: through one person I can act on Shatov so that without his
suspecting it he will put off giving information, but not more than for
twenty-four hours." All were silent.

"We really must send him to the devil!" Tolkatchenko was the first to exclaim.

"It ought to have been done long ago," Lyamshin put in malignantly, striking
the table with his fist.

"But how is it to be done?" muttered Liputin. Pyotr Stepanovitch at once took
up the question and unfolded his plan. The plan was the following day at
nightfall to draw Shatov away to a secluded spot to hand over the secret
printing press which had been in his keeping and was buried there, and there
"to settle things." He went into various essential details which we will omit
here, and explained minutely Shatov's present ambiguous attitude to the central
society, of which the reader knows already.

"That's all very well," Liputin observed irresolutely, "but since it will be
another adventure... of the same sort... it will make too great a sensation."

"No doubt," assented Pyotr Stepanovitch, "but I've provided against that. We
have the means of averting suspicion completely."

And with the same minuteness he told them about Kirillov, of his intention to
shoot himself, and of his promise to wait for a signal from them and to leave a
letter behind him taking on himself anything they dictated to him (all of which
the reader knows already).

"His determination to take his own life--a philosophic, or as I should call it,
insane decision--has become known _there_" Pyotr Stepanovitch went on to
explain. "_There_ not a thread, not a grain of dust is overlooked; everything
is turned to the service of the cause. Foreseeing how useful it might be and
satisfying themselves that his intention was quite serious, they had offered
him the means to come to Russia (he was set for some reason on dying in
Russia), gave him a commission which he promised to carry out (and he had done
so), and had, moreover, bound him by a promise, as you already know, to commit
suicide only when he was told to. He promised everything. You must note that he
belongs to the organisation on a particular footing and is anxious to be of
service; more than that I can't tell you. To-morrow, _after Shatov's affair_,
I'll dictate a note to him saying that he is responsible for his death. That
will seem very plausible: they were friends and travelled together to America,
there they quarrelled; and it will all be explained in the letter... and... and
perhaps, if it seems feasible, we might dictate something more to
Kirillov--something about the manifestoes, for instance, and even perhaps about
the fire. But I'll think about that. You needn't worry yourselves, he has no
prejudices; he'll sign anything."

There were expressions of doubt. It sounded a fantastic story. But they had all
heard more or less about Kirillov; Liputin more than all.

"He may change his mind and not want to," said Shigalov; "he is a madman
anyway, so he is not much to build upon."

"Don't be uneasy, gentlemen, he will want to," Pyotr Stepanovitch snapped out.
"I am obliged by our agreement to give him warning the day before, so it must
be to-day. I invite Liputin to go with me at once to see him and make certain,
and he will tell you, gentlemen, when he comes back--to-day if need be--whether
what I say is true. However," he broke off suddenly with intense exasperation,
as though he suddenly felt he was doing people like them too much honour by
wasting time in persuading them, "however, do as you please. If you don't
decide to do it, the union is broken up--but solely through your
insubordination and treachery. In that case we are all independent from this
moment. But under those circumstances, besides the unpleasantness of Shatov's
betrayal and its consequences, you will have brought upon yourselves another
little unpleasantness of which you were definitely warned when the union was
formed. As far as I am concerned, I am not much afraid of you, gentlemen....
Don't imagine that I am so involved with you.... But that's no matter."

"Yes, we decide to do it," Liputin pronounced.

"There's no other way out of it," muttered Tolkatchenko, "and if only Liputin
confirms about Kirillov, then...

"I am against it; with all my soul and strength I protest against such a
murderous decision," said Virginsky, standing up.

"But?" asked Pyotr Stepanovitch....

"_But_ what?"

"You said _but_... and I am waiting."

"I don't think I did say _but_... I only meant to say that if you decide to do
it, then..."

"Then?"

Virginsky did not answer.

"I think that one is at liberty to neglect danger to one's own life," said
Erkel, suddenly opening his mouth, "but if it may injure the cause, then I
consider one ought not to dare to neglect danger to one's life...."

He broke off in confusion, blushing. Absorbed as they all were in their own
ideas, they all looked at him in amazement--it was such a surprise that he too
could speak.

"I am for the cause," Virginsky pronounced suddenly.

Every one got up. It was decided to communicate once more and make final
arrangements at midday on the morrow, though without meeting. The place where
the printing press was hidden was announced and each was assigned his part and
his duty. Liputin and Pyotr Stepanovitch promptly set off together to Kirillov.

