# PART I - CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT - IV
[Metadata]: # {01.05.04}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05.04}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# IV
[TreeTag]: # {01.05.04.01}
I have said something of this gentleman's outward appearance. He was a tall,
curly-haired, thick-set fellow about forty with a purplish, rather bloated and
flabby face, with cheeks that quivered at every movement of his head, with
little bloodshot eyes that were sometimes rather crafty, with moustaches and
side-whiskers, and with an incipient double chin, fleshy and rather
unpleasant-looking. But what was most striking about him was the fact that he
appeared now wearing a dress-coat and clean linen.

"There are people on whom clean linen is almost unseemly," as Liputin had once
said when Stepan Trofimovitch reproached him in jest for being untidy. The
captain had perfectly new black gloves too, of which he held the right one in
his hand, while the left, tightly stretched and unbuttoned, covered part of the
huge fleshy fist in which he held a brand-new, glossy round hat, probably worn
for the first time that day. It appeared therefore that "the garb of love," of
which he had shouted to Shatov the day before, really did exist. All this, that
is, the dress-coat and clean linen, had been procured by Liputin's advice with
some mysterious object in view (as I found out later). There was no doubt that
his coming now (in a hired carriage) was at the instigation and with the
assistance of someone else; it would never have dawned on him, nor could he by
himself have succeeded in dressing, getting ready and making up his mind in
three-quarters of an hour, even if the scene in the porch of the cathedral had
reached his ears at once. He was not drunk, but was in the dull, heavy, dazed
condition of a man suddenly awakened after many days of drinking. It seemed as
though he would be drunk again if one were to put one's hands on his shoulders
and rock him to and fro once or twice. He was hurrying into the drawing-room
but stumbled over a rug near the doorway. Marya Timofyevna was helpless with
laughter. He looked savagely at her and suddenly took a few rapid steps towards
Varvara Petrovna.

"I have come, madam..." he blared out like a trumpet-blast.

"Be so good, sir, as to take a seat there, on that chair," said Varvara
Petrovna, drawing herself up. "I shall hear you as well from there, and it will
be more convenient for me to look at you from here."

The captain stopped short, looking blankly before him. He turned, however, and
sat down on the seat indicated close to the door. An extreme lack of
self-confidence and at the same time insolence, and a sort of incessant
irritability, were apparent in the expression of his face. He was horribly
scared, that was evident, but his self-conceit was wounded, and it might be
surmised that his mortified vanity might on occasion lead him to any
effrontery, in spite of his cowardice. He was evidently uneasy at every
movement of his clumsy person. We all know that when such gentlemen are brought
by some marvellous chance into society, they find their worst ordeal in their
own hands, and the impossibility of disposing them becomingly, of which they
are conscious at every moment. The captain sat rigid in his chair, with his hat
and gloves in his hands and his eyes fixed with a senseless stare on the stern
face of Varvara Petrovna. He would have liked, perhaps, to have looked about
more freely, but he could not bring himself to do so yet. Marya Timofyevna,
apparently thinking his appearance very funny, laughed again, but he did not
stir. Varvara Petrovna ruthlessly kept him in this position for a long time, a
whole minute, staring at him without mercy.

"In the first place allow me to learn your name from yourself," Varvara
Petrovna pronounced in measured and impressive tones.

"Captain Lebyadkin," thundered the captain. "I have come, madam..." He made a
movement again.

"Allow me!" Varvara Petrovna checked him again. "Is this unfortunate person who
interests me so much really your sister?"

"My sister, madam, who has escaped from control, for she is in a certain
condition...."

He suddenly faltered and turned crimson. "Don't misunderstand me, madam," he
said, terribly confused. "Her own brother's not going to throw mud at her... in
a certain condition doesn't mean in such a condition... in the sense of an
injured reputation... in the last stage..." he suddenly broke off.

"Sir!" said Varvara Petrovna, raising her head.

"In this condition!" he concluded suddenly, tapping the middle of his forehead
with his finger.

A pause followed.

"And has she suffered in this way for long?" asked Varvara Petrovna, with a
slight drawl.

"Madam, I have come to thank you for the generosity you showed in the porch, in
a Russian, brotherly way."

"Brotherly?"

"I mean, not brotherly, but simply in the sense that I am my sister's brother;
and believe me, madam," he went on more hurriedly, turning crimson again, "I am
not so uneducated as I may appear at first sight in your drawing-room. My
sister and I are nothing, madam, compared with the luxury we observe here.
Having enemies who slander us, besides. But on the question of reputation
Lebyadkin is proud, madam... and... and ... and I've come to repay with
thanks.... Here is money, madam!"

At this point he pulled out a pocket-book, drew out of it a bundle of notes,
and began turning them over with trembling fingers in a perfect fury of
impatience. It was evident that he was in haste to explain something, and
indeed it was quite necessary to do so. But probably feeling himself that his
fluster with the money made him look even more foolish, he lost the last traces
of self-possession. The money refused to be counted. His fingers fumbled
helplessly, and to complete his shame a green note escaped from the
pocket-book, and fluttered in zigzags on to the carpet.

"Twenty roubles, madam." He leapt up suddenly with the roll of notes in his
hand, his face perspiring with discomfort. Noticing the note which had dropped
on the floor, he was bending down to pick it up, but for some reason overcome
by shame, he dismissed it with a wave.

"For your servants, madam; for the footman who picks it up. Let them remember
my sister!"

"I cannot allow that," Varvara Petrovna brought out hurriedly, even with some
alarm.

"In that case..."

He bent down, picked it up, flushing crimson, and suddenly going up to Varvara
Petrovna held out the notes he had counted.

"What's this?" she cried, really alarmed at last, and positively shrinking back
in her chair.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch, Stepan Trofimovitch, and I all stepped forward.

"Don't be alarmed, don't be alarmed; I'm not mad, by God, I'm not mad," the
captain kept asseverating excitedly.

"Yes, sir, you're out of your senses."

"Madam, she's not at all as you suppose. I am an insignificant link. Oh, madam,
wealthy are your mansions, but poor is the dwelling of Marya Anonyma, my
sister, whose maiden name was Lebyadkin, but whom we'll call Anonyma for the
time, only for _the time,_ madam, for God Himself will not suffer it forever.
Madam, you gave her ten roubles and she took it, because it was from _you,_
madam! Do you hear, madam? From no one else in the world would this Marya
Anonyma take it, or her grandfather, the officer killed in the Caucasus before
the very eyes of Yermolov, would turn in his grave. But from you, madam, from
you she will take anything. But with one hand she takes it, and with the other
she holds out to you twenty roubles by way of subscription to one of the
benevolent committees in Petersburg and Moscow, of which you are a member...
for you published yourself, madam, in the _Moscow News,_ that you are ready to
receive subscriptions in our town, and that any one may subscribe...."

The captain suddenly broke off; he breathed hard as though after some difficult
achievement. All he said about the benevolent society had probably been
prepared beforehand, perhaps under Liputin's supervision. He perspired more
than ever; drops literally trickled down his temples. Varvara Petrovna looked
searchingly at him.

"The subscription list," she said severely, "is always downstairs in charge of
my porter. There you can enter your subscriptions if you wish to. And so I beg
you to put your notes away and not to wave them in the air. That's right. I beg
you also to go back to your seat. That's right. I am very sorry, sir, that I
made a mistake about your sister, and gave her something as though she were
poor when she is so rich. There's only one thing I don't understand, why she
can only take from me, and no one else. You so insisted upon that that I should
like a full explanation."

"Madam, that is a secret that may be buried only in the grave!" answered the
captain.

"Why?" Varvara Petrovna asked, not quite so firmly.

"Madam, madam..."

He relapsed into gloomy silence, looking on the floor, laying his right hand on
his heart. Varvara Petrovna waited, not taking her eyes off him.

"Madam!" he roared suddenly. "Will you allow me to ask you one question? Only
one, but frankly, directly, like a Russian, from the heart?"

"Kindly do so."

"Have you ever suffered madam, in your life?"

"You simply mean to say that you have been or are being ill-treated by
someone."

"Madam, madam!" He jumped up again, probably unconscious of doing so, and
struck himself on the breast. "Here in this bosom so much has accumulated, so
much that God Himself will be amazed when it is revealed at the Day of
Judgment."

"H'm! A strong expression!"

"Madam, I speak perhaps irritably...."

"Don't be uneasy. I know myself when to stop you."

"May I ask you another question, madam?"

"Ask another question."

"Can one die simply from the generosity of one's feelings?"

"I don't know, as I've never asked myself such a question."

"You don't know! You've never asked yourself such a question," he said with
pathetic irony. "Well, if that's it, if that's it...

_"Be still, despairing heart!"_

And he struck himself furiously on the chest. He was by now walking about the
room again.

It is typical of such people to be utterly incapable of keeping their desires
to themselves; they have, on the contrary, an irresistible impulse to display
them in all their unseemliness as soon as they arise. When such a gentleman
gets into a circle in which he is not at home he usually begins timidly,--but
you have only to give him an inch and he will at once rush into impertinence.
The captain was already excited. He walked about waving his arms and not
listening to questions, talked about himself very, very quickly, so that
sometimes his tongue would not obey him, and without finishing one phrase he
passed to another. It is true he was probably not quite sober. Moreover,
Lizaveta Nikolaevna was sitting there too, and though he did not once glance at
her, her presence seemed to over-excite him terribly; that, however, is only my
supposition. There must have been some reason which led Varvara Petrovna to
resolve to listen to such a man in spite of her repugnance. Praskovya Ivanovna
was simply shaking with terror, though, I believe she really did not quite
understand what it was about. Stepan Trofimovitch was trembling too, but that
was, on the contrary, because he was disposed to understand everything, and
exaggerate it. Mavriky Nikolaevitch stood in the attitude of one ready to
defend all present; Liza was pale, and she gazed fixedly with wide-open eyes at
the wild captain. Shatov sat in the same position as before, but, what was
strangest of all, Marya Timofyevna had not only ceased laughing, but had become
terribly sad. She leaned her right elbow on the table, and with a prolonged,
mournful gaze watched her brother declaiming. Darya Pavlovna alone seemed to me
calm.

"All that is nonsensical allegory," said Varvara Petrovna, getting angry at
last. "You haven't answered my question, why? I insist on an answer."

"I haven't answered, why? You insist on an answer, why?" repeated the captain,
winking. "That little word 'why' has run through all the universe from the
first day of creation, and all nature cries every minute to it's Creator,
'why?' And for seven thousand years it has had no answer, and must Captain
Lebyadkin alone answer? And is that justice, madam?"

"That's all nonsense and not to the point!" cried Varvara Petrovna, getting
angry and losing patience. "That's allegory; besides, you express yourself too
sensationally, sir, which I consider impertinence."

"Madam," the captain went on, not hearing, "I should have liked perhaps to be
called Ernest, yet I am forced to bear the vulgar name Ignat--why is that do
you suppose? I should have liked to be called Prince de Monbart, yet I am only
Lebyadkin, derived from a swan.* Why is that? I am a poet, madam, a poet in
soul, and might be getting a thousand roubles at a time from a publisher, yet I
am forced to live in a pig pail. Why? Why, madam? To my mind Russia is a freak
of nature and nothing else."

* From Lebyed, a Swan.

"Can you really say nothing more definite?"

"I can read you the poem, 'The Cockroach,' madam."

"Wha-a-t?"

"Madam, I'm not mad yet! I shall be mad, no doubt I shall be, but I'm not so
yet. Madam, a friend of mine--a most honourable man--has written a Krylov's
fable, called 'The Cockroach.' May I read it?"

"You want to read some fable of Krylov's?"

"No, it's not a fable of Krylov's I want to read. It's my fable, my own
composition. Believe me, madam, without offence I'm not so uneducated and
depraved as not to understand that Russia can boast of a great fable-writer,
Krylov, to whom the Minister of Education has raised a monument in the Summer
Gardens for the diversion of the young. Here, madam, you ask me why? The answer
is at the end of this fable, in letters of fire."

"Read your fable."

"Lived a cockroach in the world      Such was his condition,      In a glass he
chanced to fall      Full of fly-perdition."

"Heavens! What does it mean?" cried Varvara Petrovna.

"That's when flies get into a glass in the summer-time," the captain explained
hurriedly with the irritable impatience of an author interrupted in reading.
"Then it is perdition to the flies, any fool can understand. Don't interrupt,
don't interrupt. You'll see, you'll see...." He kept waving his arms.

"But he squeezed against the flies,      They woke up and cursed him, Raised to
Jove their angry cries;      'The glass is full to bursting!'      In the
middle of the din      Came along Nikifor,      Fine old man, and looking in...

I haven't quite finished it. But no matter, I'll tell it in words," the captain
rattled on. "Nikifor takes the glass, and in spite of their outcry empties away
the whole stew, flies, and beetles and all, into the pig pail, which ought to
have been done long ago. But observe, madam, observe, the cockroach doesn't
complain. That's the answer to your question, why?" he cried triumphantly.
"'The cockroach does not complain.' As for Nikifor he typifies nature," he
added, speaking rapidly and walking complacently about the room.

Varvara Petrovna was terribly angry.

"And allow me to ask you about that money said to have been received from
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, and not to have been given to you, about which you
dared to accuse a person belonging to my household."

"It's a slander!" roared Lebyadkin, flinging up his right hand tragically.

"No, it's not a slander."

"Madam, there are circumstances that force one to endure family disgrace rather
than proclaim the truth aloud. Lebyadkin will not blab, madam!"

He seemed dazed; he was carried away; he felt his importance; he certainly had
some fancy in his mind. By now he wanted to insult some one, to do something
nasty to show his power.

"Ring, please, Stepan Trofimovitch," Varvara Petrovna asked him.

"Lebyadkin's cunning, madam," he said, winking with his evil smile; "he's
cunning, but he too has a weak spot, he too at times is in the portals of
passions, and these portals are the old military hussars' bottle, celebrated by
Denis Davydov. So when he is in those portals, madam, he may happen to send a
letter in verse, a most magnificent letter--but which afterwards he would have
wished to take back, with the tears of all his life; for the feeling of the
beautiful is destroyed. But the bird has flown, you won't catch it by the tail.
In those portals now, madam, Lebyadkin may have spoken about an honourable
young lady, in the honourable indignation of a soul revolted by wrongs, and his
slanderers have taken advantage of it. But Lebyadkin is cunning, madam! And in
vain a malignant wolf sits over him every minute, filling his glass and waiting
for the end. Lebyadkin won't blab. And at the bottom of the bottle he always
finds instead Lebyadkin's cunning. But enough, oh, enough, madam! Your splendid
halls might belong to the noblest in the land, but the cockroach will not
complain. Observe that, observe that he does not complain, and recognise his
noble spirit!"

At that instant a bell rang downstairs from the porter's room, and almost at
the same moment Alexey Yegorytch appeared in response to Stepan Trofimovitch's
ring, which he had somewhat delayed answering. The correct old servant was
unusually excited.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch has graciously arrived this moment and is coming
here," he pronounced, in reply to Varvara Petrovna's questioning glance. I
particularly remember her at that moment; at first she turned pale, but
suddenly her eyes flashed. She drew herself up in her chair with an air of
extraordinary determination. Every one was astounded indeed. The utterly
unexpected arrival of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, who was not expected for another
month, was not only strange from its unexpectedness but from its fateful
coincidence with the present moment. Even the captain remained standing like a
post in the middle of the room with his mouth wide open, staring at the door
with a fearfully stupid expression.

And, behold, from the next room--a very large and long apartment--came the
sound of swiftly approaching footsteps, little, exceedingly rapid steps;
someone seemed to be running, and that someone suddenly flew into the
drawing-room, not Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but a young man who was a complete
stranger to all.

