# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - I
[Metadata]: # {01.03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {01.03.01.01}
ABOUT A WEEK had passed, and the position had begun to grow more complicated.

I may mention in passing that I suffered a great deal during that unhappy week,
as I scarcely left the side of my affianced friend, in the capacity of his most
intimate confidant. What weighed upon him most was the feeling of shame, though
we saw no one all that week, and sat indoors alone. But he was even ashamed
before me, and so much so that the more he confided to me the more vexed he was
with me for it. He was so morbidly apprehensive that he expected that every one
knew about it already, the whole town, and was afraid to show himself, not only
at the club, but even in his circle of friends. He positively would not go out
to take his constitutional till well after dusk, when it was quite dark.

A week passed and he still did not know whether he were betrothed or not, and
could not find out for a fact, however much he tried. He had not yet seen his
future bride, and did not know whether she was to be his bride or not; did not,
in fact, know whether there was anything serious in it at all. Varvara
Petrovna, for some reason, resolutely refused to admit him to her presence. In
answer to one of his first letters to her (and he wrote a great number of them)
she begged him plainly to spare her all communications with him for a time,
because she was very busy, and having a great deal of the utmost importance to
communicate to him she was waiting for a more free moment to do so, and that
she would let him know _in time_ when he could come to see her. She declared
she would send back his letters unopened, as they were "simple
self-indulgence." I read that letter myself--he showed it me.

Yet all this harshness and indefiniteness were nothing compared with his chief
anxiety. That anxiety tormented him to the utmost and without ceasing. He grew
thin and dispirited through it. It was something of which he was more ashamed
than of anything else, and of which he would not on any account speak, even to
me; on the contrary, he lied on occasion, and shuffled before me like a little
boy; and at the same time he sent for me himself every day, could not stay two
hours without me, needing me as much as air or water.

Such conduct rather wounded my vanity. I need hardly say that I had long ago
privately guessed this great secret of his, and saw through it completely. It
was my firmest conviction at the time that the revelation of this secret, this
chief anxiety of Stepan Trofimovitch's would not have redounded to his credit,
and, therefore, as I was still young, I was rather indignant at the coarseness
of his feelings and the ugliness of some of his suspicions. In my warmth--and,
I must confess, in my weariness of being his confidant--I perhaps blamed him
too much. I was so cruel as to try and force him to confess it all to me
himself, though I did recognise that it might be difficult to confess some
things. He, too, saw through me; that is, he clearly perceived that I saw
through him, and that I was angry with him indeed, and he was angry with me too
for being angry with him and seeing through him. My irritation was perhaps
petty and stupid; but the unrelieved solitude of two friends together is
sometimes extremely prejudicial to true friendship. From a certain point of
view he had a very true understanding of some aspects of his position, and
defined it, indeed, very subtly on those points about which he did not think it
necessary to be secret.

"Oh, how different she was then!" he would sometimes say to me about Varvara
Petrovna. "How different she was in the old days when we used to talk
together.... Do you know that she could talk in those days! Can you believe
that she had ideas in those days, original ideas! Now, everything has changed!
She says all that's only old-fashioned twaddle. She despises the past.... Now
she's like some shopman or cashier, she has grown hard-hearted, and she's
always cross...."

"Why is she cross now if you are carrying out her orders?" I answered.

He looked at me subtly.

"_Cher ami_; if I had not agreed she would have been dreadfully angry,
dread-ful-ly! But yet less than now that I have consented."

He was pleased with this saying of his, and we emptied a bottle between us that
evening. But that was only for a moment, next day he was worse and more
ill-humoured than ever.

But what I was most vexed with him for was that he could not bring himself to
call on the Drozdovs, as he should have done on their arrival, to renew the
acquaintance of which, so we heard they were themselves desirous, since they
kept asking about him. It was a source of daily distress to him. He talked of
Lizaveta Nikolaevna with an ecstasy which I was at a loss to understand. No
doubt he remembered in her the child whom he had once loved. But besides that,
he imagined for some unknown reason that he would at once find in her company a
solace for his present misery, and even the solution of his more serious
doubts. He expected to meet in Lizaveta Nikolaevna an extraordinary being. And
yet he did not go to see her though he meant to do so every day. The worst of
it was that I was desperately anxious to be presented to her and to make her
acquaintance, and I could look to no one but Stepan Trofimovitch to effect
this. I was frequently meeting her, in the street of course, when she was out
riding, wearing a riding-habit and mounted on a fine horse, and accompanied by
her cousin, so-called, a handsome officer, the nephew of the late General
Drozdov--and these meetings made an extraordinary impression on me at the time.
My infatuation lasted only a moment, and I very soon afterwards recognised the
impossibility of my dreams myself--but though it was a fleeting impression it
was a very real one, and so it may well be imagined how indignant I was at the
time with my poor friend for keeping so obstinately secluded.

All the members of our circle had been officially informed from the beginning
that Stepan Trofimovitch would see nobody for a time, and begged them to leave
him quite alone. He insisted on sending round a circular notice to this effect,
though I tried to dissuade him. I went round to every one at his request and
told everybody that Varvara Petrovna had given "our old man" (as we all used to
call Stepan Trofimovitch among ourselves) a special job, to arrange in order
some correspondence lasting over many years; that he had shut himself up to do
it and I was helping him. Liputin was the only one I did not have time to
visit, and I kept putting it off--to tell the real truth I was afraid to go to
him. I knew beforehand that he would not believe one word of my story, that he
would certainly imagine that there was some secret at the bottom of it, which
they were trying to hide from him alone, and as soon as I left him he would set
to work to make inquiries and gossip all over the town. While I was picturing
all this to myself I happened to run across him in the street. It turned out
that he had heard all about it from our friends, whom I had only just informed.
But, strange to say, instead of being inquisitive and asking questions about
Stepan Trofimovitch, he interrupted me, when I began apologising for not having
come to him before, and at once passed to other subjects. It is true that he
had a great deal stored up to tell me. He was in a state of great excitement,
and was delighted to have got hold of me for a listener. He began talking of
the news of the town, of the arrival of the governor's wife, "with new topics
of conversation," of an opposition party already formed in the club, of how
they were all in a hubbub over the new ideas, and how charmingly this suited
him, and so on. He talked for a quarter of an hour and so amusingly that I
could not tear myself away. Though I could not endure him, yet I must admit he
had the gift of making one listen to him, especially when he was very angry at
something. This man was, in my opinion, a regular spy from his very nature. At
every moment he knew the very latest gossip and all the trifling incidents of
our town, especially the unpleasant ones, and it was surprising to me how he
took things to heart that were sometimes absolutely no concern of his. It
always seemed to me that the leading feature of his character was envy. When I
told Stepan Trofimovitch the same evening of my meeting Liputin that morning
and our conversation, the latter to my amazement became greatly agitated, and
asked me the wild question: "Does Liputin know or not?"

I began trying to prove that there was no possibility of his finding it out so
soon, and that there was nobody from whom he could hear it. But Stepan
Trofimovitch was not to be shaken. "Well, you may believe it or not," he
concluded unexpectedly at last, "but I'm convinced that he not only knows every
detail of 'our' position, but that he knows something else besides, something
neither you nor I know yet, and perhaps never shall, or shall only know when
it's too late, when there's no turning back!..."

I said nothing, but these words suggested a great deal. For five whole days
after that we did not say one word about Liputin; it was clear to me that
Stepan Trofimovitch greatly regretted having let his tongue run away with him,
and having revealed such suspicions before me.

