# PART III - CHAPTER II. THE END OF THE FETE - III
[Metadata]: # {03.02.03}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02.03}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# III
[TreeTag]: # {03.02.03.01}
All that night, with its almost grotesque incidents, and the terrible
_dénouement_ that followed in the early morning, still seems to me like a
hideous nightmare, and is, for me at least, the most painful chapter in my
chronicle. I was late for the ball, and it was destined to end so quickly that
I arrived not long before it was over. It was eleven o'clock when I reached the
entrance of the marshal's house, where the same White Hall in which the matinée
had taken place had, in spite of the short interval between, been cleared and
made ready to serve as the chief ballroom for the whole town, as we expected,
to dance in. But far as I had been that morning from expecting the ball to be a
success, I had had no presentiment of the full truth. Not one family of the
higher circles appeared; even the subordinate officials of rather more
consequence were absent--and this was a very striking fact. As for ladies and
girls, Pyotr Stepanovitch's arguments (the duplicity of which was obvious now)
turned out to be utterly incorrect: exceedingly few had come; to four men there
was scarcely one lady--and what ladies they were! Regimental ladies of a sort,
three doctors' wives with their daughters, two or three poor ladies from the
country, the seven daughters and the niece of the secretary whom I have
mentioned already, some wives of tradesmen, of post-office clerks and other
small fry--was this what Yulia Mihailovna expected? Half the tradespeople even
were absent. As for the men, in spite of the complete absence of all persons of
consequence, there was still a crowd of them, but they made a doubtful and
suspicious impression. There were, of course, some quiet and respectful
officers with their wives, some of the most docile fathers of families, like
that secretary, for instance, the father of his seven daughters. All these
humble, insignificant people had come, as one of these gentlemen expressed it,
because it was "inevitable." But, on the other hand, the mass of free-and-easy
people and the mass too of those whom Pyotr Stepanovitch and I had suspected of
coming in without tickets, seemed even bigger than in the afternoon. So far
they were all sitting in the refreshment bar, and had gone straight there on
arriving, as though it were the meeting-place they had agreed upon. So at least
it seemed to me. The refreshment bar had been placed in a large room, the last
of several opening out of one another. Here Prohoritch was installed with all
the attractions of the club cuisine and with a tempting display of drinks and
dainties. I noticed several persons whose coats were almost in rags and whose
get-up was altogether suspicious and utterly unsuitable for a ball. They had
evidently been with great pains brought to a state of partial sobriety which
would not last long; and goodness knows where they had been brought from, they
were not local people. I knew, of course, that it was part of Yulia
Mihailovna's idea that the ball should be of the most democratic character, and
that "even working people and shopmen should not be excluded if any one of that
class chanced to pay for a ticket." She could bravely utter such words in her
committee with absolute security that none of the working people of our town,
who all lived in extreme poverty, would dream of taking a ticket. But in spite
of the democratic sentiments of the committee, I could hardly believe that such
sinister-looking and shabby people could have been admitted in the regular way.
But who could have admitted them, and with what object? Lyamshin and Liputin
had already been deprived of their steward's rosettes, though they were present
at the ball, as they were taking part in the "literary quadrille." But, to my
amazement, Liputin's place was taken by the divinity student, who had caused
the greatest scandal at the matinée by his skirmish with Stepan Trofimovitch;
and Lyamshin's was taken by Pyotr Stepanovitch himself. What was to be looked
for under the circumstances?

I tried to listen to the conversation. I was struck by the wildness of some
ideas I heard expressed. It was maintained in one group, for instance, that
Yulia Mihailovna had arranged Liza's elopement with Stavrogin and had been paid
by the latter for doing so. Even the sum paid was mentioned. It was asserted
that she had arranged the whole fête with a view to it, and that that was the
reason why half the town had not turned up at the ball, and that Lembke himself
was so upset about it that "his mind had given way," and that, crazy as he was,
"she had got him in tow." There was a great deal of laughter too, hoarse, wild
and significant. Every one was criticising the ball, too, with great severity,
and abusing Yulia Mihailovna without ceremony. In fact it was disorderly,
incoherent, drunken and excited babble, so it was difficult to put it together
and make anything of it. At the same time there were simple-hearted people
enjoying themselves at the refreshment-bar; there were even some ladies of the
sort who are surprised and frightened at nothing, very genial and festive,
chiefly military ladies with their husbands. They made parties at the little
tables, were drinking tea, and were very merry. The refreshment-bar made a snug
refuge for almost half of the guests. Yet in a little time all this mass of
people must stream into the ballroom. It was horrible to think of it!

Meanwhile the prince had succeeded in arranging three skimpy quadrilles in the
White Hall. The young ladies were dancing, while their parents were enjoying
watching them. But many of these respectable persons had already begun to think
how they could, after giving their girls a treat, get off in good time before
"the trouble began." Absolutely every one was convinced that it certainly would
begin. It would be difficult for me to describe Yulia Mihailovna's state of
mind. I did not talk to her though I went close up to her. She did not respond
to the bow I made her on entering; she did not notice me (really did not
notice). There was a painful look in her face and a contemptuous and haughty
though restless and agitated expression in her eyes. She controlled herself
with evident suffering--for whose sake, with what object? She certainly ought
to have gone away, still more to have got her husband away, and she remained!
From her face one could see that her eyes were "fully opened," and that it was
useless for her to expect any thing more. She did not even summon Pyotr
Stepanovitch (he seemed to avoid her; I saw him in the refreshment-room, he was
extremely lively). But she remained at the ball and did not let Andrey
Antonovitch leave her side for a moment. Oh, up to the very last moment, even
that morning she would have repudiated any hint about his health with genuine
indignation. But now her eyes were to be opened on this subject too. As for me,
I thought from the first glance that Andrey Antonovitch looked worse than he
had done in the morning. He seemed to be plunged into a sort of oblivion and
hardly to know where he was. Sometimes he looked about him with unexpected
severity--at me, for instance, twice. Once he tried to say something; he began
loudly and audibly but did not finish the sentence, throwing a modest old clerk
who happened to be near him almost into a panic. But even this humble section
of the assembly held sullenly and timidly aloof from Yulia Mihailovna and at
the same time turned upon her husband exceedingly strange glances, open and
staring, quite out of keeping with their habitually submissive demeanour.

"Yes, that struck me, and I suddenly began to guess about Andrey Antonovitch,"
Yulia Mihailovna confessed to me afterwards.

Yes, she was to blame again! Probably when after my departure she had settled
with Pyotr Stepanovitch that there should be a ball and that she should be
present she must have gone again to the study where Andrey Antonovitch was
sitting, utterly "shattered" by the matinée; must again have used all her
fascinations to persuade him to come with her. But what misery she must have
been in now! And yet she did not go away. Whether it was pride or simply she
lost her head, I do not know. In spite of her haughtiness, she attempted with
smiles and humiliation to enter into conversation with some ladies, but they
were confused, confined themselves to distrustful monosyllables, "Yes" and
"No," and evidently avoided her.

The only person of undoubted consequence who was present at the ball was that
distinguished general whom I have described already, the one who after
Stavrogin's duel with Gaganov opened the door to public impatience at the
marshal's wife's. He walked with an air of dignity through the rooms, looked
about, and listened, and tried to appear as though he had come rather for the
sake of observation than for the sake of enjoying himself.... He ended by
establishing himself beside Yulia Mihailovna and not moving a step away from
her, evidently trying to keep up her spirits, and reassure her. He certainly
was a most kind-hearted man, of very high rank, and so old that even compassion
from him was not wounding. But to admit to herself that this old gossip was
venturing to pity her and almost to protect her, knowing that he was doing her
honour by his presence, was very vexatious. The general stayed by her and never
ceased chattering.

"They say a town can't go on without seven righteous men... seven, I think it
is, I am not sure of the number fixed.... I don't know how many of these seven,
the certified righteous of the town... have the honour of being present at your
ball. Yet in spite of their presence I begin to feel unsafe. _Vous me
pardonnez, charmante dame, n'est-ce pas?_ I speak allegorically, but I went
into the refreshment-room and I am glad I escaped alive.... Our priceless
Prohoritch is not in his place there, and I believe his bar will be destroyed
before morning. But I am laughing. I am only waiting to see what the 'literary
quadrille' is going to be like, and then home to bed. You must excuse a gouty
old fellow. I go early to bed, and I would advise you too to go 'by-by,' as
they say _aux enfants._ I've come, you know, to have a look at the pretty
girls... whom, of course, I could meet nowhere in such profusion as here. They
all live beyond the river and I don't drive out so far. There's a wife of an
officer... in the chasseurs I believe he is... who is distinctly pretty,
distinctly, and... she knows it herself. I've talked to the sly puss; she is a
sprightly one... and the girls too are fresh-looking; but that's all, there's
nothing but freshness. Still, it's a pleasure to look at them. There are some
rosebuds, but their lips are thick. As a rule there's an irregularity about
female beauty in Russia, and... they are a little like buns.... _vous me
pardonnez, n'est-ce pas?_... with good eyes, however, laughing eyes.... These
rose buds are charming for two years when they are young... even for three...
then they broaden out and are spoilt forever... producing in their husbands
that deplorable indifference which does so much to promote the woman
movement... that is, if I understand it correctly.... H'm! It's a fine hall;
the rooms are not badly decorated. It might be worse. The music might be much
worse.... I don't say it ought to have been. What makes a bad impression is
that there are so few ladies. I say nothing about the dresses. It's bad that
that chap in the grey trousers should dare to dance the cancan so openly. I can
forgive him if he does it in the gaiety of his heart, and since he is the local
chemist.... Still, eleven o'clock is a bit early even for chemists. There were
two fellows fighting in the refreshment-bar and they weren't turned out. At
eleven o'clock people ought to be turned out for fighting, whatever the
standard of manners.... Three o'clock is a different matter; then one has to
make concessions to public opinion--if only this ball survives till three
o'clock. Varvara Petrovna has not kept her word, though, and hasn't sent
flowers. H'm! She has no thoughts for flowers, _pauvre mère!_ And poor Liza!
Have you heard? They say it's a mysterious story... and Stavrogin is to the
front again.... H'm! I would have gone home to bed... I can hardly keep my eyes
open. But when is this 'literary quadrille' coming on?"

At last the "literary quadrille" began. Whenever of late there had been
conversation in the town on the ball it had invariably turned on this literary
quadrille, and as no one could imagine what it would be like, it aroused
extraordinary curiosity. Nothing could be more unfavourable to its chance of
success, and great was the disappointment.

The side doors of the White Hall were thrown open and several masked figures
appeared. The public surrounded them eagerly. All the occupants of the
refreshment-bar trooped to the last man into the hall. The masked figures took
their places for the dance. I succeeded in making my way to the front and
installed myself just behind Yulia Mihailovna, Von Lembke, and the general. At
this point Pyotr Stepanovitch, who had kept away till that time, skipped up to
Yulia Mihailovna.

"I've been in the refreshment-room all this time, watching," he whispered, with
the air of a guilty schoolboy, which he, however, assumed on purpose to
irritate her even more. She turned crimson with anger.

"You might give up trying to deceive me now at least, insolent man!" broke from
her almost aloud, so that it was heard by other people. Pyotr Stepanovitch
skipped away extremely well satisfied with himself.

It would be difficult to imagine a more pitiful, vulgar, dull and insipid
allegory than this "literary quadrille." Nothing could be imagined less
appropriate to our local society. Yet they say it was Karmazinov's idea. It was
Liputin indeed who arranged it with the help of the lame teacher who had been
at the meeting at Virginsky's. But Karmazinov had given the idea and had, it
was said, meant to dress up and to take a special and prominent part in it. The
quadrille was made up of six couples of masked figures, who were not in fancy
dress exactly, for their clothes were like every one else's. Thus, for
instance, one short and elderly gentleman wearing a dress-coat--in fact,
dressed like every one else--wore a venerable grey beard, tied on (and this
constituted his disguise). As he danced he pounded up and down, taking tiny and
rapid steps on the same spot with a stolid expression of countenance. He gave
vent to sounds in a subdued but husky bass, and this huskiness was meant to
suggest one of the well-known papers. Opposite this figure danced two giants, X
and Z, and these letters were pinned on their coats, but what the letters meant
remained unexplained. "Honest Russian thought" was represented by a middle-aged
gentleman in spectacles, dress-coat and gloves, and wearing fetters (real
fetters). Under his arm he had a portfolio containing papers relating to some
"case." To convince the sceptical, a letter from abroad testifying to the
honesty of "honest Russian thought" peeped out of his pocket. All this was
explained by the stewards, as the letter which peeped out of his pocket could
not be read. "Honest Russian thought" had his right hand raised and in it held
a glass as though he wanted to propose a toast. In a line with him on each side
tripped a crop-headed Nihilist girl; while _vis-à-vis_ danced another elderly
gentleman in a dress-coat with a heavy cudgel in his hand. He was meant to
represent a formidable periodical (not a Petersburg one), and seemed to be
saying, "I'll pound you to a jelly." But in spite of his cudgel he could not
bear the spectacles of "honest Russian thought" fixed upon him and tried to
look away, and when he did the _pas de deux,_ he twisted, turned, and did not
know what to do with himself--so terrible, probably, were the stings of his
conscience! I don't remember all the absurd tricks they played, however; it was
all in the same style, so that I felt at last painfully ashamed. And this same
expression, as it were, of shame was reflected in the whole public, even on the
most sullen figures that had come out of the refreshment-room. For some time
all were silent and gazed with angry perplexity. When a man is ashamed he
generally begins to get angry and is disposed to be cynical. By degrees a
murmur arose in the audience.

"What's the meaning of it?" a man who had come in from the refreshment-room
muttered in one of the groups.

"It's silly."

"It's something literary. It's a criticism of the _Voice_."

"What's that to me?"

From another group:

"Asses!"

"No, they are not asses; it's we who are the asses."

"Why are you an ass?"

"I am not an ass."

"Well, if you are not, I am certainly not."

From a third group:

"We ought to give them a good smacking and send them flying."

"Pull down the hall!"

From a fourth group:

"I wonder the Lembkes are not ashamed to look on!"

"Why should they be ashamed? You are not."

"Yes, I am ashamed, and he is the governor."

"And you are a pig."

"I've never seen such a commonplace ball in my life," a lady observed
viciously, quite close to Yulia Mihailovna, obviously with the intention of
being overheard. She was a stout lady of forty with rouge on her cheeks,
wearing a bright-coloured silk dress. Almost every one in the town knew her,
but no one received her. She was the widow of a civil councillor, who had left
her a wooden house and a small pension; but she lived well and kept horses. Two
months previously she had called on Yulia Mihailovna, but the latter had not
received her.

"That might have been foreseen," she added, looking insolently into Yulia
Mihailovna's face.

"If you could foresee it, why did you come?" Yulia Mihailovna could not resist
saying.

"Because I was too simple," the sprightly lady answered instantly, up in arms
and eager for the fray; but the general intervened.

_"Chère dame"_--he bent over to Yulia Mihailovna--"you'd really better be
going. We are only in their way and they'll enjoy themselves thoroughly without
us. You've done your part, you've opened the ball, now leave them in peace. And
Andrey Antonovitch doesn't seem to be feeling quite satisfactorily.... To avoid
trouble."

But it was too late.

All through the quadrille Andrey Antonovitch gazed at the dancers with a sort
of angry perplexity, and when he heard the comments of the audience he began
looking about him uneasily. Then for the first time he caught sight of some of
the persons who had come from the refreshment-room; there was an expression of
extreme wonder in his face. Suddenly there was a loud roar of laughter at a
caper that was cut in the quadrille. The editor of the "menacing periodical,
not a Petersburg one," who was dancing with the cudgel in his hands, felt
utterly unable to endure the spectacled gaze of "honest Russian thought," and
not knowing how to escape it, suddenly in the last figure advanced to meet him
standing on his head, which was meant, by the way, to typify the continual
turning upside down of common sense by the menacing non-Petersburg gazette. As
Lyamshin was the only one who could walk standing on his head, he had
undertaken to represent the editor with the cudgel. Yulia Mihailovna had had no
idea that anyone was going to walk on his head. "They concealed that from me,
they concealed it," she repeated to me afterwards in despair and indignation.
The laughter from the crowd was, of course, provoked not by the allegory, which
interested no one, but simply by a man's walking on his head in a swallow-tail
coat. Lembke flew into a rage and shook with fury.

"Rascal!" he cried, pointing to Lyamshin, "take hold of the scoundrel, turn him
over... turn his legs... his head... so that his head's up... up!"

Lyamshin jumped on to his feet. The laughter grew louder.

"Turn out all the scoundrels who are laughing!" Lembke prescribed suddenly.

There was an angry roar and laughter in the crowd.

"You can't do like that, your Excellency."

"You mustn't abuse the public."

"You are a fool yourself!" a voice cried suddenly from a corner.

"Filibusters!" shouted someone from the other end of the room.

Lembke looked round quickly at the shout and turned pale. A vacant smile came
on to his lips, as though he suddenly understood and remembered something.

"Gentlemen," said Yulia Mihailovna, addressing the crowd which was pressing
round them, as she drew her husband away--"gentlemen, excuse Andrey
Antonovitch. Andrey Antonovitch is unwell... excuse... forgive him, gentlemen."

I positively heard her say "forgive him." It all happened very quickly. But I
remember for a fact that a section of the public rushed out of the hall
immediately after those words of Yulia Mihailovna's as though panic-stricken. I
remember one hysterical, tearful feminine shriek:

"Ach, the same thing again!"

And in the retreat of the guests, which was almost becoming a crush, another
bomb exploded exactly as in the afternoon.

"Fire! All the riverside quarter is on fire!"

I don't remember where this terrible cry rose first, whether it was first
raised in the hall, or whether someone ran upstairs from the entry, but it was
followed by such alarm that I can't attempt to describe it. More than half the
guests at the ball came from the quarter beyond the river, and were owners or
occupiers of wooden houses in that district. They rushed to the windows, pulled
back the curtains in a flash, and tore down the blinds. The riverside was in
flames. The fire, it is true, was only beginning, but it was in flames in three
separate places--and that was what was alarming.

"Arson! The Shpigulin men!" roared the crowd.

I remember some very characteristic exclamations:

"I've had a presentiment in my heart that there'd be arson, I've had a
presentiment of it these last few days!"

"The Shpigulin men, the Shpigulin men, no one else!"

"We were all lured here on purpose to set fire to it!"

This last most amazing exclamation came from a woman; it was an unintentional
involuntary shriek of a housewife whose goods were burning. Every one rushed
for the door. I won't describe the crush in the vestibule over sorting out
cloaks, shawls, and pelisses, the shrieks of the frightened women, the weeping
of the young ladies. I doubt whether there was any theft, but it was no wonder
that in such disorder some went away without their wraps because they were
unable to find them, and this grew into a legend with many additions, long
preserved in the town. Lembke and Yulia Mihailovna were almost crushed by the
crowd at the doors.

"Stop, every one! Don't let anyone out!" yelled Lembke, stretching out his arms
menacingly towards the crowding people.

"Every one without exception to be strictly searched at once!"

A storm of violent oaths rose from the crowd.

"Andrey Antonovitch! Andrey Antonovitch!" cried Yulia Mihailovna in complete
despair.

"Arrest her first!" shouted her husband, pointing his finger at her
threateningly. "Search her first! The ball was arranged with a view to the
fire...."

She screamed and fell into a swoon. (Oh, there was no doubt of its being a real
one.) The general, the prince, and I rushed to her assistance; there were
others, even among the ladies, who helped us at that difficult moment. We
carried the unhappy woman out of this hell to her carriage, but she only
regained consciousness as she reached the house, and her first utterance was
about Andrey Antonovitch again. With the destruction of all her fancies, the
only thing left in her mind was Andrey Antonovitch. They sent for a doctor. I
remained with her for a whole hour; the prince did so too. The general, in an
access of generous feeling (though he had been terribly scared), meant to
remain all night "by the bedside of the unhappy lady," but within ten minutes
he fell asleep in an arm-chair in the drawing-room while waiting for the
doctor, and there we left him.

The chief of the police, who had hurried from the ball to the fire, had
succeeded in getting Andrey Antonovitch out of the hall after us, and attempted
to put him into Yulia Mihailovna's carriage, trying all he could to persuade
his Excellency "to seek repose." But I don't know why he did not insist. Andrey
Antonovitch, of course, would not hear of repose, and was set on going to the
fire; but that was not a sufficient reason. It ended in his taking him to the
fire in his droshky. He told us afterwards that Lembke was gesticulating all
the way and "shouting orders that it was impossible to obey owing to their
unusualness." It was officially reported later on that his Excellency had at
that time been in a delirious condition "owing to a sudden fright."

There is no need to describe how the ball ended. A few dozen rowdy fellows, and
with them some ladies, remained in the hall. There were no police present. They
would not let the orchestra go, and beat the musicians who attempted to leave.
By morning they had pulled all Prohoritch's stall to pieces, had drunk
themselves senseless, danced the Kamarinsky in its unexpurgated form, made the
rooms in a shocking mess, and only towards daybreak part of this hopelessly
drunken rabble reached the scene of the fire to make fresh disturbances there.
The other part spent the night in the rooms dead drunk, with disastrous
consequences to the velvet sofas and the floor. Next morning, at the earliest
possibility, they were dragged out by their legs into the street. So ended the
fête for the benefit of the governesses of our province.

