# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - V
[Metadata]: # {01.03.05}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.05}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# V
[TreeTag]: # {01.03.05.01}
We were all standing in the doorway. It was the moment when hosts and guests
hurriedly exchange the last and most cordial words, and then part to their
mutual gratification.

"The reason he's so cross to-day," Liputin dropped all at once, as it were
casually, when he was just going out of the room, "is because he had a
disturbance to-day with Captain Lebyadkin over his sister. Captain Lebyadkin
thrashes that precious sister of his, the mad girl, every day with a whip, a
real Cossack whip, every morning and evening. So Alexey Nilitch has positively
taken the lodge so as not to be present. Well, good-bye."

"A sister? An invalid? With a whip?" Stepan Trofimovitch cried out, as though
he had suddenly been lashed with a whip himself. "What sister? What Lebyadkin?"
All his former terror came back in an instant.

"Lebyadkin! Oh, that's the retired captain; he used only to call himself a
lieutenant before...."

"Oh, what is his rank to me? What sister? Good heavens!... You say Lebyadkin?
But there used to be a Lebyadkin here...."

"That's the very man. 'Our' Lebyadkin, at Virginsky's, you remember?"

"But he was caught with forged papers?"

"Well, now he's come back. He's been here almost three weeks and under the most
peculiar circumstances."

"Why, but he's a scoundrel?"

"As though no one could be a scoundrel among us," Liputin grinned suddenly, his
knavish little eyes seeming to peer into Stepan Trofimovitch's soul.

"Good heavens! I didn't mean that at all... though I quite agree with you about
that, with you particularly. But what then, what then? What did you mean by
that? You certainly meant something by that."

"Why, it's all so trivial.... This captain to all appearances went away from us
at that time; not because of the forged papers, but simply to look for his
sister, who was in hiding from him somewhere, it seems; well, and now he's
brought her and that's the whole story. Why do you seem frightened, Stepan
Trofimovitch? I only tell this from his drunken chatter though, he doesn't
speak of it himself when he's sober. He's an irritable man, and, so to speak,
Ã¦sthetic in a military style; only he has bad taste. And this sister is lame as
well as mad. She seems to have been seduced by someone, and Mr. Lebyadkin has,
it seems, for many years received a yearly grant from the seducer by way of
compensation for the wound to his honour, so it would seem at least from his
chatter, though I believe it's only drunken talk. It's simply his brag.
Besides, that sort of thing is done much cheaper. But that he has a sum of
money is perfectly certain. Ten days ago he was walking barefoot, and now I've
seen hundreds in his hands. His sister has fits of some sort every day, she
shrieks and he 'keeps her in order' with the whip. You must inspire a woman
with respect, he says. What I can't understand is how Shatov goes on living
above him. Alexey Nilitch has only been three days with them. They were
acquainted in Petersburg, and now he's taken the lodge to get away from the
disturbance."

"Is this all true?" said Stepan Trofimovitch, addressing the engineer.

"You do gossip a lot, Liputin," the latter muttered wrathfully.

"Mysteries, secrets! Where have all these mysteries and secrets among us sprung
from?" Stepan Trofimovitch could not refrain from exclaiming.

The engineer frowned, flushed red, shrugged his shoulders and went out of the
room.

"Alexey Nilitch positively snatched the whip out of his hand, broke it and
threw it out of the window, and they had a violent quarrel," added Liputin.

"Why are you chattering, Liputin; it's stupid. What for?" Alexey Nilitch turned
again instantly.

"Why be so modest and conceal the generous impulses of one's soul; that is, of
your soul? I'm not speaking of my own."

"How stupid it is... and quite unnecessary. Lebyadkin's stupid and quite
worthless--and no use to the cause, and... utterly mischievous. Why do you keep
babbling all sorts of things? I'm going."

"Oh, what a pity!" cried Liputin with a candid smile, "or I'd have amused you
with another little story, Stepan Trofimovitch. I came, indeed, on purpose to
tell you, though I dare say you've heard it already. Well, till another time,
Alexey Nilitch is in such a hurry. Good-bye for the present. The story concerns
Varvara Petrovna. She amused me the day before yesterday; she sent for me on
purpose. It's simply killing. Good-bye."

But at this Stepan Trofimovitch absolutely would not let him go. He seized him
by the shoulders, turned him sharply back into the room, and sat him down in a
chair. Liputin was positively scared.

"Why, to be sure," he began, looking warily at Stepan Trofimovitch from his
chair, "she suddenly sent for me and asked me 'confidentially' my private
opinion, whether Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch is mad or in his right mind. Isn't
that astonishing?"

"You're out of your mind!" muttered Stepan Trofimovitch, and suddenly, as
though he were beside himself: "Liputin, you know perfectly well that you only
came here to tell me something insulting of that sort and... something worse!"

In a flash, I recalled his conjecture that Liputin knew not only more than we
did about our affair, but something else which we should never know.

"Upon my word, Stepan Trofimovitch," muttered Liputin, seeming greatly alarmed,
"upon my word..."

"Hold your tongue and begin! I beg you, Mr. Kirillov, to come back too, and be
present. I earnestly beg you! Sit down, and you, Liputin, begin directly,
simply and without any excuses."

"If I had only known it would upset you so much I wouldn't have begun at all.
And of course I thought you knew all about it from Varvara Petrovna herself."

"You didn't think that at all. Begin, begin, I tell you."

"Only do me the favour to sit down yourself, or how can I sit here when you are
running about before me in such excitement. I can't speak coherently."

Stepan Trofimovitch restrained himself and sank impressively into an easy
chair. The engineer stared gloomily at the floor. Liputin looked at them with
intense enjoyment,

"How am I to begin?... I'm too overwhelmed...."

