# PART II - CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY - I
[Metadata]: # {02.06.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY
I
# I
The date of the fÃªte was definitely fixed, and Von Lembke became more and more
depressed. He was full of strange and sinister forebodings, and this made Yulia
Mihailovna seriously uneasy. Indeed, things were not altogether satisfactory.
Our mild governor had left the affairs of the province a little out of gear; at
the moment we were threatened with cholera; serious outbreaks of cattle plague
had appeared in several places; fires were prevalent that summer in towns and
villages; whilst among the peasantry foolish rumours of incendiarism grew
stronger and stronger. Cases of robbery were twice as numerous as usual. But
all this, of course, would have been perfectly ordinary had there been no other
and more weighty reasons to disturb the equanimity of Andrey Antonovitch, who
had till then been in good spirits.

What struck Yulia Mihailovna most of all was that he became more silent and,
strange to say, more secretive every day. Yet it was hard to imagine what he
had to hide. It is true that he rarely opposed her and as a rule followed her
lead without question. At her instigation, for instance, two or three
regulations of a risky and hardly legal character were introduced with the
object of strengthening the authority of the governor. There were several
ominous instances of transgressions being condoned with the same end in view;
persons who deserved to be sent to prison and Siberia were, solely because she
insisted, recommended for promotion. Certain complaints and inquiries were
deliberately and systematically ignored. All this came out later on. Not only
did Lembke sign everything, but he did not even go into the question of the
share taken by his wife in the execution of his duties. On the other hand, he
began at times to be restive about "the most trifling matters," to the surprise
of Yulia Mihailovna. No doubt he felt the need to make up for the days of
suppression by brief moments of mutiny. Unluckily, Yulia Mihailovna was unable,
for all her insight, to understand this honourable punctiliousness in an
honourable character. Alas, she had no thought to spare for that, and that was
the source of many misunderstandings.

There are some things of which it is not suitable for me to write, and indeed I
am not in a position to do so. It is not my business to discuss the blunders of
administration either, and I prefer to leave out this administrative aspect of
the subject altogether. In the chronicle I have begun I've set before myself a
different task. Moreover a great deal will be brought to light by the
Commission of Inquiry which has just been appointed for our province; it's only
a matter of waiting a little. Certain explanations, however, cannot be omitted.

But to return to Yulia Mihailovna. The poor lady (I feel very sorry for her)
might have attained all that attracted and allured her (renown and so on)
without any such violent and eccentric actions as she resolved upon at the very
first step. But either from an exaggerated passion for the romantic or from the
frequently blighted hopes of her youth, she felt suddenly, at the change of her
fortunes, that she had become one of the specially elect, almost God's
anointed, "over whom there gleamed a burning tongue of fire," and this tongue
of flame was the root of the mischief, for, after all, it is not like a
chignon, which will fit any woman's head. But there is nothing of which it is
more difficult to convince a woman than of this; on the contrary, anyone who
cares to encourage the delusion in her will always be sure to meet with
success. And people vied with one another in encouraging the delusion in Yulia
Mihailovna. The poor woman became at once the sport of conflicting influences,
while fully persuaded of her own originality. Many clever people feathered
their nests and took advantage of her simplicity during the brief period of her
rule in the province. And what a jumble there was under this assumption of
independence! She was fascinated at the same time by the aristocratic element
and the system of big landed properties and the increase of the governor's
power, and the democratic element, and the new reforms and discipline, and
free-thinking and stray Socialistic notions, and the correct tone of the
aristocratic salon and the free-and-easy, almost pot-house, manners of the
young people that surrounded her. She dreamed of "giving happiness" and
reconciling the irreconcilable, or, rather, of uniting all and everything in
the adoration of her own person. She had favourites too; she was particularly
fond of Pyotr Stepanovitch, who had recourse at times to the grossest flattery
in dealing with her. But she was attracted by him for another reason, an
amazing one, and most characteristic of the poor lady: she was always hoping
that he would reveal to her a regular conspiracy against the government.
Difficult as it is to imagine such a thing, it really was the case. She fancied
for some reason that there must be a nihilist plot concealed in the province.
By his silence at one time and his hints at another Pyotr Stepanovitch did much
to strengthen this strange idea in her. She imagined that he was in
communication with every revolutionary element in Russia but at the same time
passionately devoted to her. To discover the plot, to receive the gratitude of
the government, to enter on a brilliant career, to influence the young "by
kindness," and to restrain them from extremes--all these dreams existed side by
side in her fantastic brain. She had saved Pyotr Stepanovitch, she had
conquered him (of this she was for some reason firmly convinced); she would
save others. None, none of them should perish, she should save them all; she
would pick them out; she would send in the right report of them; she would act
in the interests of the loftiest justice, and perhaps posterity and Russian
liberalism would bless her name; yet the conspiracy would be discovered. Every
advantage at once.

Still it was essential that Andrey Antonovitch should be in rather better
spirits before the festival. He must be cheered up and reassured. For this
purpose she sent Pyotr Stepanovitch to him in the hope that he would relieve
his depression by some means of consolation best known to himself, perhaps by
giving him some information, so to speak, first hand. She put implicit faith in
his dexterity.

It was some time since Pyotr Stepanovitch had been in Mr. von Lembke's study.
He popped in on him just when the sufferer was in a most stubborn mood.

