# PART I - CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT - VI
[Metadata]: # {01.05.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05.06}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# VI
[TreeTag]: # {01.05.06.01}
It was very little of it talk, however; it was mostly exclamation. I've
forgotten a little the order in which things happened, for a scene of confusion
followed. Stepan Trofimovitch uttered some exclamation in French, clasping his
hands, but Varvara Petrovna had no thought for him. Even Mavriky Nikolaevitch
muttered some rapid, jerky comment. But Pyotr Stepanovitch was the most excited
of all. He was trying desperately with bold gesticulations to persuade Varvara
Petrovna of something, but it was a long time before I could make out what it
was. He appealed to Praskovya Ivanovna, and Lizaveta Nikolaevna too, even, in
his excitement, addressed a passing shout to his father--in fact he seemed all
over the room at once. Varvara Petrovna, flushing all over, sprang up from her
seat and cried to Praskovya Ivanovna:

"Did you hear what he said to her here just now, did you hear it?"

But the latter was incapable of replying. She could only mutter something and
wave her hand. The poor woman had troubles of her own to think about. She kept
turning her head towards Liza and was watching her with unaccountable terror,
but she didn't even dare to think of getting up and going away until her
daughter should get up. In the meantime the captain wanted to slip away. That I
noticed. There was no doubt that he had been in a great panic from the instant
that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had made his appearance; but Pyotr Stepanovitch
took him by the arm and would not let him go.

"It is necessary, quite necessary," he pattered on to Varvara Petrovna, still
trying to persuade her. He stood facing her, as she was sitting down again in
her easy chair, and, I remember, was listening to him eagerly; he had succeeded
in securing her attention.

"It is necessary. You can see for yourself, Varvara Petrovna, that there is a
misunderstanding here, and much that is strange on the surface, and yet the
thing's as clear as daylight, and as simple as my finger. I quite understand
that no one has authorised me to tell the story, and I dare say I look
ridiculous putting myself forward. But in the first place, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch attaches no sort of significance to the matter himself, and,
besides, there are incidents of which it is difficult for a man to make up his
mind to give an explanation himself. And so it's absolutely necessary that it
should be undertaken by a third person, for whom it's easier to put some
delicate points into words. Believe me, Varvara Petrovna, that Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch is not at all to blame for not immediately answering your
question just now with a full explanation, it's all a trivial affair. I've
known him since his Petersburg days. Besides, the whole story only does honour
to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, if one must make use of that vague word 'honour.'"

"You mean to say that you were a witness of some incident which gave rise... to
this misunderstanding?" asked Varvara Petrovna.

"I witnessed it, and took part in it," Pyotr Stepanovitch hastened to declare.

"If you'll give me your word that this will not wound Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's
delicacy in regard to his feeling for me, from whom he ne-e-ver conceals
anything... and if you are convinced also that your doing this will be
agreeable to him..."

"Certainly it will be agreeable, and for that reason I consider it a
particularly agreeable duty. I am convinced that he would beg me to do it
himself."

The intrusive desire of this gentleman, who seemed to have dropped on us from
heaven to tell stories about other people's affairs, was rather strange and
inconsistent with ordinary usage.

But he had caught Varvara Petrovna by touching on too painful a spot. I did not
know the man's character at that time, and still less his designs.

"I am listening," Varvara Petrovna announced with a reserved and cautious
manner. She was rather painfully aware of her condescension.

"It's a short story; in fact if you like it's not a story at all," he rattled
on, "though a novelist might work it up into a novel in an idle hour. It's
rather an interesting little incident, Praskovya Ivanovna, and I am sure that
Lizaveta Nikolaevna will be interested to hear it, because there are a great
many things in it that are odd if not wonderful. Five years ago, in Petersburg,
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch made the acquaintance of this gentleman, this very Mr.
Lebyadkin who's standing here with his mouth open, anxious, I think, to slip
away at once. Excuse me, Varvara Petrovna. I don't advise you to make your
escape though, you discharged clerk in the former commissariat department; you
see, I remember you very well. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and I know very well
what you've been up to here, and, don't forget, you'll have to answer for it. I
ask your pardon once more, Varvara Petrovna. In those days Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch used to call this gentleman his Falstaff; that must be," he
explained suddenly, "some old burlesque character, at whom every one laughs,
and who is willing to let every one laugh at him, if only they'll pay him for
it. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was leading at that time in Petersburg a life, so
to say, of mockery. I can't find another word to describe it, because he is not
a man who falls into disillusionment, and he disdained to be occupied with work
at that time. I'm only speaking of that period, Varvara Petrovna. Lebyadkin had
a sister, the woman who was sitting here just now. The brother and sister
hadn't a corner* of their own, but were always quartering themselves on
different people. He used to hang about the arcades in the Gostiny Dvor, always
wearing his old uniform, and would stop the more respectable-looking
passers-by, and everything he got from them he'd spend in drink. His sister
lived like the birds of heaven. She'd help people in their 'corners,' and do
jobs for them on occasion. It was a regular Bedlam. I'll pass over the
description of this life in 'corners,' a life to which Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
had taken,"

* In the poorer quarters of Russian towns a single room is often      let out
to several families, each of which occupies a "corner."

"at that time, from eccentricity. I'm only talking of that period, Varvara
Petrovna; as for 'eccentricity,' that's his own expression. He does not conceal
much from me. Mlle. Lebyadkin, who was thrown in the way of meeting Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch very often, at one time, was fascinated by his appearance. He
was, so to say, a diamond set in the dirty background of her life. I am a poor
hand at describing feelings, so I'll pass them over; but some of that dirty lot
took to jeering at her once, and it made her sad. They always had laughed at
her, but she did not seem to notice it before. She wasn't quite right in her
head even then, but very different from what she is now. There's reason to
believe that in her childhood she received something like an education through
the kindness of a benevolent lady. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had never taken the
slightest notice of her. He used to spend his time chiefly in playing
preference with a greasy old pack of cards for stakes of a quarter-farthing
with clerks. But once, when she was being ill-treated, he went up (without
inquiring into the cause) and seized one of the clerks by the collar and flung
him out of a second-floor window. It was not a case of chivalrous indignation
at the sight of injured innocence; the whole operation took place in the midst
of roars of laughter, and the one who laughed loudest was Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch himself. As it all ended without harm, they were reconciled and
began drinking punch. But the injured innocent herself did not forget it. Of
course it ended in her becoming completely crazy. I repeat I'm a poor hand at
describing feelings. But a delusion was the chief feature in this case. And
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch aggravated that delusion as though he did it on
purpose. Instead of laughing at her he began all at once treating Mlle.
Lebyadkin with sudden respect. Kirillov, who was there (a very original man,
Varvara Petrovna, and very abrupt, you'll see him perhaps one day, for he's
here now), well, this Kirillov who, as a rule, is perfectly silent, suddenly
got hot, and said to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, I remember, that he treated the
girl as though she were a marquise, and that that was doing for her altogether.
I must add that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had rather a respect for this Kirillov.
What do you suppose was the answer he gave him: 'You imagine, Mr. Kirillov,
that I am laughing at her. Get rid of that idea, I really do respect her, for
she's better than any of us.' And, do you know, he said it in such a serious
tone. Meanwhile, he hadn't really said a word to her for two or three months,
except 'good morning' and 'good-bye.' I remember, for I was there, that she
came at last to the point of looking on him almost as her betrothed who dared
not 'elope with her,' simply because he had many enemies and family
difficulties, or something of the sort. There was a great deal of laughter
about it. It ended in Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's making provision for her when
he had to come here, and I believe he arranged to pay a considerable sum, three
hundred roubles a year, if not more, as a pension for her. In short it was all
a caprice, a fancy of a man prematurely weary on his side, perhaps--it may even
have been, as Kirillov says, a new experiment of a blas√© man, with the object
of finding out what you can bring a crazy cripple to." (You picked out on
purpose, he said, the lowest creature, a cripple, forever covered with disgrace
and blows, knowing, too, that this creature was dying of comic love for you,
and set to work to mystify her completely on purpose, simply to see what would
come of it.) "Though, how is a man so particularly to blame for the fancies of
a crazy woman, to whom he had hardly uttered two sentences the whole time.
There are things, Varvara Petrovna, of which it is not only impossible to speak
sensibly, but it's even nonsensical to begin speaking of them at all. Well,
eccentricity then, let it stand at that. Anyway, there's nothing worse to be
said than that; and yet now they've made this scandal out of it. ... I am to
some extent aware, Varvara Petrovna, of what is happening here."

The speaker suddenly broke off and was turning to Lebyadkin. But Varvara
Petrovna checked him. She was in a state of extreme exaltation.

"Have you finished?" she asked.

"Not yet; to complete my story I should have to ask this gentleman one or two
questions if you'll allow me... you'll see the point in a minute, Varvara
Petrovna."

"Enough, afterwards, leave it for the moment I beg you. Oh, I was quite right
to let you speak!"

"And note this, Varvara Petrovna," Pyotr Stepanovitch said hastily. "Could
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch have explained all this just now in answer to your
question, which was perhaps too peremptory?"

"Oh, yes, it was."

"And wasn't I right in saying that in some cases it's much easier for a third
person to explain things than for the person interested?"

"Yes, yes... but in one thing you were mistaken, and, I see with regret, are
still mistaken."

"Really, what's that?"

"You see.... But won't you sit down, Pyotr Stepanovitch?"

"Oh, as you please. I am tired indeed. Thank you." He instantly moved up an
easy chair and turned it so that he had Varvara Petrovna on one side and
Praskovya Ivanovna at the table on the other, while he faced Lebyadkin, from
whom he did not take his eyes for one minute.

"You are mistaken in calling this eccentricity...."

"Oh, if it's only that...."

"No, no, no, wait a little," said Varvara Petrovna, who was obviously about to
say a good deal and to speak with enthusiasm. As soon as Pyotr Stepanovitch
noticed it, he was all attention.

"No, it was something higher than eccentricity, and I assure you, something
sacred even! A proud man who has suffered humiliation early in life and reached
the stage of 'mockery' as you so subtly called it--Prince Harry, in fact, to
use the capital nickname Stepan Trofimovitch gave him then, which would have
been perfectly correct if it were not that he is more like Hamlet, to my
thinking at least."

_"Et vous avez raison,"_ Stepan Trofimovitch pronounced, impressively and with
feeling.

"Thank you, Stepan Trofimovitch. I thank you particularly too for your
unvarying faith in Nicolas, in the loftiness of his soul and of his destiny.
That faith you have even strengthened in me when I was losing heart."

_"Ch√®re, ch√®re."_ Stepan Trofimovitch was stepping forward, when he checked
himself, reflecting that it was dangerous to interrupt.

"And if Nicolas had always had at his side" (Varvara Petrovna almost shouted)
"a gentle Horatio, great in his humility--another excellent expression of
yours, Stepan Trofimovitch--he might long ago have been saved from the sad and
'sudden demon of irony,' which has tormented him all his life. ('The demon of
irony' was a wonderful expression of yours again, Stepan Trofimovitch.) But
Nicolas has never had an Horatio or an Ophelia. He had no one but his mother,
and what can a mother do alone, and in such circumstances? Do you know, Pyotr
Stepanovitch, it's perfectly comprehensible to me now that a being like Nicolas
could be found even in such filthy haunts as you have described. I can so
clearly picture now that 'mockery' of life. (A wonderfully subtle expression of
yours!) That insatiable thirst of contrast, that gloomy background against
which he stands out like a diamond, to use your comparison again, Pyotr
Stepanovitch. And then he meets there a creature ill-treated by every one,
crippled, half insane, and at the same time perhaps filled with noble
feelings."

"H'm.... Yes, perhaps."

"And after that you don't understand that he's not laughing at her like every
one. Oh, you people! You can't understand his defending her from insult,
treating her with respect 'like a marquise' (this Kirillov must have an
exceptionally deep understanding of men, though he didn't understand Nicolas).
It was just this contrast, if you like, that led to the trouble. If the unhappy
creature had been in different surroundings, perhaps she would never have been
brought to entertain such a frantic delusion. Only a woman can understand it,
Pyotr Stepanovitch, only a woman. How sorry I am that you... not that you're
not a woman, but that you can't be one just for the moment so as to
understand."

"You mean in the sense that the worse things are the better it is. I
understand, I understand, Varvara Petrovna. It's rather as it is in religion;
the harder life is for a man or the more crushed and poor the people are, the
more obstinately they dream of compensation in heaven; and if a hundred
thousand priests are at work at it too, inflaming their delusion, and
speculating on it, then... I understand you, Varvara Petrovna, I assure you."

"That's not quite it; but tell me, ought Nicolas to have laughed at her and
have treated her as the other clerks, in order to extinguish the delusion in
this unhappy organism." (Why Varvara Petrovna used the word organism I couldn't
understand.) "Can you really refuse to recognise the lofty compassion, the
noble tremor of the whole organism with which Nicolas answered Kirillov: 'I do
not laugh at her.' A noble, sacred answer!"

"Sublime," muttered Stepan Trofimovitch.

"And observe, too, that he is by no means so rich as you suppose. The money is
mine and not his, and he would take next to nothing from me then."

"I understand, I understand all that, Varvara Petrovna," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, with a movement of some impatience.

"Oh, it's my character! I recognise myself in Nicolas. I recognise that
youthfulness, that liability to violent, tempestuous impulses. And if we ever
come to be friends, Pyotr Stepanovitch, and, for my part, I sincerely hope we
may, especially as I am so deeply indebted to you, then, perhaps you'll
understand...."

"Oh, I assure you, I hope for it too," Pyotr Stepanovitch muttered jerkily.

"You'll understand then the impulse which leads one in the blindness of
generous feeling to take up a man who is unworthy of one in every respect, a
man who utterly fails to understand one, who is ready to torture one at every
opportunity and, in contradiction to everything, to exalt such a man into a
sort of ideal, into a dream. To concentrate in him all one's hopes, to bow down
before him; to love him all one's life, absolutely without knowing why--perhaps
just because he was unworthy of it.... Oh, how I've suffered all my life, Pyotr
Stepanovitch!"

Stepan Trofimovitch, with a look of suffering on his face, began trying to
catch my eye, but I turned away in time.

"... And only lately, only lately--oh, how unjust I've been to Nicolas! ... You
would not believe how they have been worrying me on all sides, all, all,
enemies, and rascals, and friends, friends perhaps more than enemies. When the
first contemptible anonymous letter was sent to me, Pyotr Stepanovitch, you'll
hardly believe it, but I had not strength enough to treat all this wickedness
with contempt.... I shall never, never forgive myself for my weakness."

"I had heard something of anonymous letters here already," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, growing suddenly more lively, "and I'll find out the writers of
them, you may be sure."

"But you can't imagine the intrigues that have been got up here. They have even
been pestering our poor Praskovya Ivanovna, and what reason can they have for
worrying her? I was quite unfair to you to-day perhaps, my dear Praskovya
Ivanovna," she added in a generous impulse of kindliness, though not without a
certain triumphant irony.

"Don't say any more, my dear," the other lady muttered reluctantly. "To my
thinking we'd better make an end of all this; too much has been said."

And again she looked timidly towards Liza, but the latter was looking at Pyotr
Stepanovitch.

"And I intend now to adopt this poor unhappy creature, this insane woman who
has lost everything and kept only her heart," Varvara Petrovna exclaimed
suddenly. "It's a sacred duty I intend to carry out. I take her under my
protection from this day."

"And that will be a very good thing in one way," Pyotr Stepanovitch cried,
growing quite eager again. "Excuse me, I did not finish just now. It's just the
care of her I want to speak of. Would you believe it, that as soon as Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch had gone (I'm beginning from where I left off, Varvara
Petrovna), this gentleman here, this Mr. Lebyadkin, instantly imagined he had
the right to dispose of the whole pension that was provided for his sister. And
he did dispose of it. I don't know exactly how it had been arranged by Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch at that time. But a year later, when he learned from abroad
what had happened, he was obliged to make other arrangements. Again, I don't
know the details; he'll tell you them himself. I only know that the interesting
young person was placed somewhere in a remote nunnery, in very comfortable
surroundings, but under friendly superintendence--you understand? But what do
you think Mr. Lebyadkin made up his mind to do? He exerted himself to the
utmost, to begin with, to find where his source of income, that is his sister,
was hidden. Only lately he attained his object, took her from the nunnery,
asserting some claim to her, and brought her straight here. Here he doesn't
feed her properly, beats her, and bullies her. As soon as by some means he gets
a considerable sum from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, he does nothing but get drunk,
and instead of gratitude ends by impudently defying Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
making senseless demands, threatening him with proceedings if the pension is
not paid straight into his hands. So he takes what is a voluntary gift from
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch as a tax--can you imagine it? Mr. Lebyadkin, is that
all true that I have said just now?"

The captain, who had till that moment stood in silence looking down, took two
rapid steps forward and turned crimson.

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, you've treated me cruelly," he brought out abruptly.

"Why cruelly? How? But allow us to discuss the question of cruelty or
gentleness later on. Now answer my first question; is it true all that I have
said or not? If you consider it's false you are at liberty to give your own
version at once."

"I... you know yourself, Pyotr Stepanovitch," the captain muttered, but he
could not go on and relapsed into silence. It must be observed that Pyotr
Stepanovitch was sitting in an easy chair with one leg crossed over the other,
while the captain stood before him in the most respectful attitude.

Lebyadkin's hesitation seemed to annoy Pyotr Stepanovitch; a spasm of anger
distorted his face.

"Then you have a statement you want to make?" he said, looking subtly at the
captain. "Kindly speak. We're waiting for you."

"You know yourself Pyotr Stepanovitch, that I can't say anything."

"No, I don't know it. It's the first time I've heard it. Why can't you speak?"

The captain was silent, with his eyes on the ground.

"Allow me to go, Pyotr Stepanovitch," he brought out resolutely.

"No, not till you answer my question: is it all true that I've said?"

"It is true," Lebyadkin brought out in a hollow voice, looking at his
tormentor. Drops of perspiration stood out on his forehead.

"Is it _all_ true?"

"It's all true."

"Have you nothing to add or to observe? If you think that we've been unjust,
say so; protest, state your grievance aloud."

"No, I think nothing."

"Did you threaten Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch lately?"

"It was... it was more drink than anything, Pyotr Stepanovitch." He suddenly
raised his head. "If family honour and undeserved disgrace cry out among men
then--then is a man to blame?" he roared suddenly, forgetting himself as
before.

"Are you sober now, Mr. Lebyadkin?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch looked at him penetratingly.

"I am... sober."

"What do you mean by family honour and undeserved disgrace?"

"I didn't mean anybody, anybody at all. I meant myself," the captain said,
collapsing again.

"You seem to be very much offended by what I've said about you and your
conduct? You are very irritable, Mr. Lebyadkin. But let me tell you I've hardly
begun yet what I've got to say about your conduct, in its real sense. I'll
begin to discuss your conduct in its real sense. I shall begin, that may very
well happen, but so far I've not begun, in a real sense."

Lebyadkin started and stared wildly at Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"Pyotr Stepanovitch, I am just beginning to wake up."

"H'm! And it's I who have waked you up?"

"Yes, it's you who have waked me, Pyotr Stepanovitch; and I've been asleep for
the last four years with a storm-cloud hanging over me. May I withdraw at last,
Pyotr Stepanovitch?"

"Now you may, unless Varvara Petrovna thinks it necessary..."

But the latter dismissed him with a wave of her hand.

The captain bowed, took two steps towards the door, stopped suddenly, laid his
hand on his heart, tried to say something, did not say it, and was moving
quickly away. But in the doorway he came face to face with Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch; the latter stood aside. The captain shrank into himself, as it
were, before him, and stood as though frozen to the spot, his eyes fixed upon
him like a rabbit before a boa-constrictor. After a little pause Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch waved him aside with a slight motion of his hand, and walked
into the drawing-room.

