# PART I - CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY - VI
[Metadata]: # {01.01.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01.06}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY
VI
# VI
They spent almost the whole winter season in Petersburg. But by Lent everything
burst like a rainbow-coloured soap-bubble.

Their dreams were dissipated, and the muddle, far from being cleared up, had
become even more revoltingly incomprehensible. To begin with, connections with
the higher spheres were not established, or only on a microscopic scale, and by
humiliating exertions. In her mortification Varvara Petrovna threw herself
heart and soul into the "new ideas," and began giving evening receptions. She
invited literary people, and they were brought to her at once in multitudes.
Afterwards they came of themselves without invitation, one brought another.
Never had she seen such literary men. They were incredibly vain, but quite open
in their vanity, as though they were performing a duty by the display of it.
Some (but by no means all) of them even turned up intoxicated, seeming,
however, to detect in this a peculiar, only recently discovered, merit. They
were all strangely proud of something. On every face was written that they had
only just discovered some extremely important secret. They abused one another,
and took credit to themselves for it. It was rather difficult to find out what
they had written exactly, but among them there were critics, novelists,
dramatists, satirists, and exposers of abuses. Stepan Trofimovitch penetrated
into their very highest circle from which the movement was directed. Incredible
heights had to be scaled to reach this group; but they gave him a cordial
welcome, though, of course, no one of them had ever heard of him or knew
anything about him except that he "represented an idea." His manoeuvres among
them were so successful that he got them twice to Varvara Petrovna's salon in
spite of their Olympian grandeur. These people were very serious and very
polite; they behaved nicely; the others were evidently afraid of them; but it
was obvious that they had no time to spare. Two or three former literary
celebrities who happened to be in Petersburg, and with whom Varvara Petrovna
had long maintained a most refined correspondence, came also. But to her
surprise these genuine and quite indubitable celebrities were stiller than
water, humbler than the grass, and some of them simply hung on to this new
rabble, and were shamefully cringing before them. At first Stepan Trofimovitch
was a success. People caught at him and began to exhibit him at public literary
gatherings. The first time he came on to the platform at some public reading in
which he was to take part, he was received with enthusiastic clapping which
lasted for five minutes. He recalled this with tears nine years afterwards,
though rather from his natural artistic sensibility than from gratitude. "I
swear, and I'm ready to bet," he declared (but only to me, and in secret),
"that not one of that audience knew anything whatever about me." A noteworthy
admission. He must have had a keen intelligence since he was capable of
grasping his position so clearly even on the platform, even in such a state of
exaltation; it also follows that he had not a keen intelligence if, nine years
afterwards, he could not recall it without mortification. He was made to sign
two or three collective protests (against what he did not know); he signed
them. Varvara Petrovna too was made to protest against some "disgraceful
action" and she signed too. The majority of these new people, however, though
they visited Varvara Petrovna, felt themselves for some reason called upon to
regard her with contempt, and with undisguised irony. Stepan Trofimovitch
hinted to me at bitter moments afterwards that it was from that time she had
been envious of him. She saw, of course, that she could not get on with these
people, yet she received them eagerly, with all the hysterical impatience of
her sex, and, what is more, she expected something. At her parties she talked
little, although she could talk, but she listened the more. They talked of the
abolition of the censorship, and of phonetic spelling, of the substitution of
the Latin characters for the Russian alphabet, of someone's having been sent
into exile the day before, of some scandal, of the advantage of splitting
Russia into nationalities united in a free federation, of the abolition of the
army and the navy, of the restoration of Poland as far as the Dnieper, of the
peasant reforms, and of the manifestoes, of the abolition of the hereditary
principle, of the family, of children, and of priests, of women's rights, of
Kraevsky's house, for which no one ever seemed able to forgive Mr. Kraevsky,
and so on, and so on. It was evident that in this mob of new people there were
many impostors, but undoubtedly there were also many honest and very attractive
people, in spite of some surprising characteristics in them. The honest ones
were far more difficult to understand than the coarse and dishonest, but it was
impossible to tell which was being made a tool of by the other. When Varvara
Petrovna announced her idea of founding a magazine, people flocked to her in
even larger numbers, but charges of being a capitalist and an exploiter of
labour were showered upon her to her face. The rudeness of these accusations
was only equalled by their unexpectedness. The aged General Ivan Ivanovitch
Drozdov, an old friend and comrade of the late General Stavrogin's, known to us
all here as an extremely stubborn and irritable, though very estimable, man (in
his own way, of course), who ate a great deal, and was dreadfully afraid of
atheism, quarrelled at one of Varvara Petrovna's parties with a distinguished
young man. The latter at the first word exclaimed, "You must be a general if
you talk like that," meaning that he could find no word of abuse worse than
"general."

Ivan Ivanovitch flew into a terrible passion: "Yes, sir, I am a general, and a
lieutenant-general, and I have served my Tsar, and you, sir, are a puppy and an
infidel!"

An outrageous scene followed. Next day the incident was exposed in print, and
they began getting up a collective protest against Varvara Petrovna's
disgraceful conduct in not having immediately turned the general out. In an
illustrated paper there appeared a malignant caricature in which Varvara
Petrovna, Stepan Trofimovitch, and General Drozdov were depicted as three
reactionary friends. There were verses attached to this caricature written by a
popular poet especially for the occasion. I may observe, for my own part, that
many persons of general's rank certainly have an absurd habit of saying, "I
have served my Tsar"...just as though they had not the same Tsar as all the
rest of us, their simple fellow-subjects, but had a special Tsar of their own.

It was impossible, of course, to remain any longer in Petersburg, all the more
so as Stepan Trofimovitch was overtaken by a complete fiasco. He could not
resist talking of the claims of art, and they laughed at him more loudly as
time went on. At his last lecture he thought to impress them with patriotic
eloquence, hoping to touch their hearts, and reckoning on the respect inspired
by his "persecution." He did not attempt to dispute the uselessness and
absurdity of the word "fatherland," acknowledged the pernicious influence of
religion, but firmly and loudly declared that boots were of less consequence
than Pushkin; of much less, indeed. He was hissed so mercilessly that he burst
into tears, there and then, on the platform. Varvara Petrovna took him home
more dead than alive. _"On m'a trait√© comme un vieux bonnet de coton,"_ he
babbled senselessly. She was looking after him all night, giving him
laurel-drops and repeating to him till daybreak, "You will still be of use; you
will still make your mark; you will be appreciated ... in another place."

Early next morning five literary men called on Varvara Petrovna, three of them
complete strangers, whom she had never set eyes on before. With a stern air
they informed her that they had looked into the question of her magazine, and
had brought her their decision on the subject. Varvara Petrovna had never
authorised anyone to look into or decide anything concerning her magazine.
Their decision was that, having founded the magazine, she should at once hand
it over to them with the capital to run it, on the basis of a co-operative
society. She herself was to go back to Skvoreshniki, not forgetting to take
with her Stepan Trofimovitch, who was "out of date." From delicacy they agreed
to recognise the right of property in her case, and to send her every year a
sixth part of the net profits. What was most touching about it was that of
these five men, four certainly were not actuated by any mercenary motive, and
were simply acting in the interests of the "cause."

"We came away utterly at a loss," Stepan Trofimovitch used to say afterwards.
"I couldn't make head or tail of it, and kept muttering, I remember, to the
rumble of the train:

'Vyek, and vyek, and Lyov Kambek,      Lyov Kambek and vyek, and vyek.'

and goodness knows what, all the way to Moscow. It was only in Moscow that I
came to myself--as though we really might find something different there."

"Oh, my friends!" he would exclaim to us sometimes with fervour, "you cannot
imagine what wrath and sadness overcome your whole soul when a great idea,
which you have long cherished as holy, is caught up by the ignorant and dragged
forth before fools like themselves into the street, and you suddenly meet it in
the market unrecognisable, in the mud, absurdly set up, without proportion,
without harmony, the plaything of foolish louts! No! In our day it was not so,
and it was not this for which we strove. No, no, not this at all. I don't
recognise it.... Our day will come again and will turn all the tottering fabric
of to-day into a true path. If not, what will happen?..."

