# PART I - CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY - IX
[Metadata]: # {01.01.09}
[Descriptor]: # {01.01.09}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY
IX
# IX
At one time it was reported about the town that our little circle was a hotbed
of nihilism, profligacy, and godlessness, and the rumour gained more and more
strength. And yet we did nothing but indulge in the most harmless, agreeable,
typically Russian, light-hearted liberal chatter. "The higher liberalism" and
the "higher liberal," that is, a liberal without any definite aim, is only
possible in Russia.

Stepan Trofimovitch, like every witty man, needed a listener, and, besides
that, he needed the consciousness that he was fulfilling the lofty duty of
disseminating ideas. And finally he had to have someone to drink champagne
with, and over the wine to exchange light-hearted views of a certain sort,
about Russia and the "Russian spirit," about God in general, and the "Russian
God" in particular, to repeat for the hundredth time the same Russian
scandalous stories that every one knew and every one repeated. We had no
distaste for the gossip of the town which often, indeed, led us to the most
severe and loftily moral verdicts. We fell into generalising about humanity,
made stern reflections on the future of Europe and mankind in general,
authoritatively predicted that after Cæsarism France would at once sink into
the position of a second-rate power, and were firmly convinced that this might
terribly easily and quickly come to pass. We had long ago predicted that the
Pope would play the part of a simple archbishop in a united Italy, and were
firmly convinced that this thousand-year-old question had, in our age of
humanitarianism, industry, and railways, become a trifling matter. But, of
course, "Russian higher liberalism" could not look at the question in any other
way. Stepan Trofimovitch sometimes talked of art, and very well, though rather
abstractly. He sometimes spoke of the friends of his youth--all names
noteworthy in the history of Russian progress. He talked of them with emotion
and reverence, though sometimes with envy. If we were very much bored, the Jew,
Lyamshin (a little post-office clerk), a wonderful performer on the piano, sat
down to play, and in the intervals would imitate a pig, a thunderstorm, a
confinement with the first cry of the baby, and so on, and so on; it was only
for this that he was invited, indeed. If we had drunk a great deal--and that
did happen sometimes, though not often--we flew into raptures, and even on one
occasion sang the "Marseillaise" in chorus to the accompaniment of Lyamshin,
though I don't know how it went off. The great day, the nineteenth of February,
we welcomed enthusiastically, and for a long time beforehand drank toasts in
its honour. But that was long ago, before the advent of Shatov or Virginsky,
when Stepan Trofimovitch was still living in the same house with Varvara
Petrovna. For some time before the great day Stepan Trofimovitch fell into the
habit of muttering to himself well-known, though rather far-fetched, lines
which must have been written by some liberal landowner of the past:

_"The peasant with his axe is coming,_ _Something terrible will happen."_

Something of that sort, I don't remember the exact words. Varvara Petrovna
overheard him on one occasion, and crying, "Nonsense, nonsense!" she went out
of the room in a rage. Liputin, who happened to be present, observed
malignantly to Stepan Trofimovitch:

"It'll be a pity if their former serfs really do some mischief to _messieurs
les_ landowners to celebrate the occasion," and he drew his forefinger round
his throat.

"_Cher ami,_" Stepan Trofimovitch observed, "believe me that--this (he repeated
the gesture) will never be of any use to our landowners nor to any of us in
general. We shall never be capable of organising anything even without our
heads, though our heads hinder our understanding more than anything."

I may observe that many people among us anticipated that something
extraordinary, such as Liputin predicted, would take place on the day of the
emancipation, and those who held this view were the so-called "authorities" on
the peasantry and the government. I believe Stepan Trofimovitch shared this
idea, so much so that almost on the eve of the great day he began asking
Varvara Petrovna's leave to go abroad; in fact he began to be uneasy. But the
great day passed, and some time passed after it, and the condescending smile
reappeared on Stepan Trofimovitch's lips. In our presence he delivered himself
of some noteworthy thoughts on the character of the Russian in general, and the
Russian peasant in particular.

"Like hasty people we have been in too great a hurry with our peasants," he
said in conclusion of a series of remarkable utterances. "We have made them the
fashion, and a whole section of writers have for several years treated them as
though they were newly discovered curiosities. We have put laurel-wreaths on
lousy heads. The Russian village has given us only 'Kamarinsky' in a thousand
years. A remarkable Russian poet who was also something of a wit, seeing the
great Rachel on the stage for the first time cried in ecstasy, 'I wouldn't
exchange Rachel for a peasant!' I am prepared to go further. I would give all
the peasants in Russia for one Rachel. It's high time to look things in the
face more soberly, and not to mix up our national rustic pitch with _bouquet de
l'Impératrice._"

Liputin agreed at once, but remarked that one had to perjure oneself and praise
the peasant all the same for the sake of being progressive, that even ladies in
good society shed tears reading "Poor Anton," and that some of them even wrote
from Paris to their bailiffs that they were, henceforward, to treat the
peasants as humanely as possible.

It happened, and as ill-luck would have it just after the rumours of the Anton
Petrov affair had reached us, that there was some disturbance in our province
too, only about ten miles from Skvoreshniki, so that a detachment of soldiers
was sent down in a hurry.

This time Stepan Trofimovitch was so much upset that he even frightened us. He
cried out at the club that more troops were needed, that they ought to be
telegraphed for from another province; he rushed off to the governor to protest
that he had no hand in it, begged him not to allow his name on account of old
associations to be brought into it, and offered to write about his protest to
the proper quarter in Petersburg. Fortunately it all passed over quickly and
ended in nothing, but I was surprised at Stepan Trofimovitch at the time.

Three years later, as every one knows, people were beginning to talk of
nationalism, and "public opinion" first came upon the scene. Stepan
Trofimovitch laughed a great deal.

"My friends," he instructed us, "if our nationalism has 'dawned' as they keep
repeating in the papers--it's still at school, at some German 'Peterschule,'
sitting over a German book and repeating its everlasting German lesson, and its
German teacher will make it go down on its knees when he thinks fit. I think
highly of the German teacher. But nothing has happened and nothing of the kind
has dawned and everything is going on in the old way, that is, as ordained by
God. To my thinking that should be enough for Russia, _pour notre Sainte
Russie_. Besides, all this Slavism and nationalism is too old to be new.
Nationalism, if you like, has never existed among us except as a distraction
for gentlemen's clubs, and Moscow ones at that. I'm not talking of the days of
Igor, of course. And besides it all comes of idleness. Everything in Russia
comes of idleness, everything good and fine even. It all springs from the
charming, cultured, whimsical idleness of our gentry! I'm ready to repeat it
for thirty thousand years. We don't know how to live by our own labour. And as
for the fuss they're making now about the 'dawn' of some sort of public
opinion, has it so suddenly dropped from heaven without any warning? How is it
they don't understand that before we can have an opinion of our own we must
have work, our own work, our own initiative in things, our own experience.
Nothing is to be gained for nothing. If we work we shall have an opinion of our
own. But as we never shall work, our opinions will be formed for us by those
who have hitherto done the work instead of us, that is, as always, Europe, the
everlasting Germans--our teachers for the last two centuries. Moreover, Russia
is too big a tangle for us to unravel alone without the Germans, and without
hard work. For the last twenty years I've been sounding the alarm, and the
summons to work. I've given up my life to that appeal, and, in my folly I put
faith in it. Now I have lost faith in it, but I sound the alarm still, and
shall sound it to the tomb. I will pull at the bell-ropes until they toll for
my own requiem!"

"Alas! We could do nothing but assent. We applauded our teacher and with what
warmth, indeed! And, after all, my friends, don't we still hear to-day, every
hour, at every step, the same "charming," "clever," "liberal," old Russian
nonsense? Our teacher believed in God.

"I can't understand why they make me out an infidel here," he used to say
sometimes. "I believe in God, _mais distinguons_, I believe in Him as a Being
who is conscious of Himself in me only. I cannot believe as my Nastasya (the
servant) or like some country gentleman who believes 'to be on the safe side,'
or like our dear Shatov--but no, Shatov doesn't come into it. Shatov believes
'on principle,' like a Moscow Slavophil. As for Christianity, for all my
genuine respect for it, I'm not a Christian. I am more of an antique pagan,
like the great Goethe, or like an ancient Greek. The very fact that
Christianity has failed to understand woman is enough, as George Sand has so
splendidly shown in one of her great novels. As for the bowings, fasting and
all the rest of it, I don't understand what they have to do with me. However
busy the informers may be here, I don't care to become a Jesuit. In the year
1847 Byelinsky, who was abroad, sent his famous letter to Gogol, and warmly
reproached him for believing in some sort of God. _Entre nous soit dit,_ I can
imagine nothing more comic than the moment when Gogol (the Gogol of that
period!) read that phrase, and... the whole letter! But dismissing the humorous
aspect, and, as I am fundamentally in agreement, I point to them and say--these
were men! They knew how to love their people, they knew how to suffer for them,
they knew how to sacrifice everything for them, yet they knew how to differ
from them when they ought, and did not filch certain ideas from them. Could
Byelinsky have sought salvation in Lenten oil, or peas with radish!..." But at
this point Shatov interposed.

"Those men of yours never loved the people, they didn't suffer for them, and
didn't sacrifice anything for them, though they may have amused themselves by
imagining it!" he growled sullenly, looking down, and moving impatiently in his
chair.

"They didn't love the people!" yelled Stepan Trofimovitch. "Oh, how they loved
Russia!"

"Neither Russia nor the people!" Shatov yelled too, with flashing eyes. "You
can't love what you don't know and they had no conception of the Russian
people. All of them peered at the Russian people through their fingers, and you
do too; Byelinsky especially: from that very letter to Gogol one can see it.
Byelinsky, like the Inquisitive Man in Krylov's fable, did not notice the
elephant in the museum of curiosities, but concentrated his whole attention on
the French Socialist beetles; he did not get beyond them. And yet perhaps he
was cleverer than any of you. You've not only overlooked the people, you've
taken up an attitude of disgusting contempt for them, if only because you could
not imagine any but the French people, the Parisians indeed, and were ashamed
that the Russians were not like them. That's the naked truth. And he who has no
people has no God. You may be sure that all who cease to understand their own
people and lose their connection with them at once lose to the same extent the
faith of their fathers, and become atheistic or indifferent. I'm speaking the
truth! This is a fact which will be realised. That's why all of you and all of
us now are either beastly atheists or careless, dissolute imbeciles, and
nothing more. And you too, Stepan Trofimovitch, I don't make an exception of
you at all! In fact, it is on your account I am speaking, let me tell you
that!"

As a rule, after uttering such monologues (which happened to him pretty
frequently) Shatov snatched up his cap and rushed to the door, in the full
conviction that everything was now over, and that he had cut short all friendly
relations with Stepan Trofimovitch forever. But the latter always succeeded in
stopping him in time.

"Hadn't we better make it up, Shatov, after all these endearments," he would
say, benignly holding out his hand to him from his arm-chair.

Shatov, clumsy and bashful, disliked sentimentality. Externally he was rough,
but inwardly, I believe, he had great delicacy. Although he often went too far,
he was the first to suffer for it. Muttering something between his teeth in
response to Stepan Trofimovitch's appeal, and shuffling with his feet like a
bear, he gave a sudden and unexpected smile, put down his cap, and sat down in
the same chair as before, with his eyes stubbornly fixed on the ground. Wine
was, of course, brought in, and Stepan Trofimovitch proposed some suitable
toast, for instance the memory of some leading man of the past.

