# PART I - CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING. - VIII
[Metadata]: # {01.02.08}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02.08}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# VIII
[TreeTag]: # {01.02.08.01}
Stepan Trofimovitch's estate, as we used to call it (which consisted of fifty
souls, reckoning in the old fashion, and bordered on Skvoreshniki), was not
really his at all, but his first wife's, and so belonged now to his son Pyotr
Stepanovitch Verhovensky. Stepan Trofimovitch was simply his trustee, and so,
when the nestling was full-fledged, he had given his father a formal
authorisation to manage the estate. This transaction was a profitable one for
the young man. He received as much as a thousand roubles a year by way of
revenue from the estate, though under the new regime it could not have yielded
more than five hundred, and possibly not that. God knows how such an
arrangement had arisen. The whole sum, however, was sent the young man by
Varvara Petrovna, and Stepan Trofimovitch had nothing to do with a single
rouble of it. On the other hand, the whole revenue from the land remained in
his pocket, and he had, besides, completely ruined the estate, letting it to a
mercenary rogue, and without the knowledge of Varvara Petrovna selling the
timber which gave the estate its chief value. He had some time before sold the
woods bit by bit. It was worth at least eight thousand, yet he had only
received five thousand for it. But he sometimes lost too much at the club, and
was afraid to ask Varvara Petrovna for the money. She clenched her teeth when
she heard at last of everything. And now, all at once, his son announced that
he was coming himself to sell his property for what he could get for it, and
commissioned his father to take steps promptly to arrange the sale. It was
clear that Stepan Trofimovitch, being a generous and disinterested man, felt
ashamed of his treatment of _ce cher enfant_ (whom he had seen for the last
time nine years before as a student in Petersburg). The estate might originally
have been worth thirteen or fourteen thousand. Now it was doubtful whether
anyone would give five for it. No doubt Stepan Trofimovitch was fully entitled
by the terms of the trust to sell the wood, and taking into account the
incredibly large yearly revenue of a thousand roubles which had been sent
punctually for so many years, he could have put up a good defence of his
management. But Stepan Trofimovitch was a generous man of exalted impulses. A
wonderfully fine inspiration occurred to his mind: when Petrusha returned, to
lay on the table before him the maximum price of fifteen thousand roubles
without a hint at the sums that had been sent him hitherto, and warmly and with
tears to press _ce cher fils_ to his heart, and so to make an end of all
accounts between them. He began cautiously and indirectly unfolding this
picture before Varvara Petrovna. He hinted that this would add a peculiarly
noble note to their friendship... to their "idea." This would set the parents
of the last generation--and people of the last generation generally--in such a
disinterested and magnanimous light in comparison with the new frivolous and
socialistic younger generation. He said a great deal more, but Varvara Petrovna
was obstinately silent. At last she informed him airily that she was prepared
to buy their estate, and to pay for it the maximum price, that is, six or seven
thousand (though four would have been a fair price for it). Of the remaining
eight thousand which had vanished with the woods she said not a word.

This conversation took place a month before the match was proposed to him.
Stepan Trofimovitch was overwhelmed, and began to ponder. There might in the
past have been a hope that his son would not come, after all--an outsider, that
is to say, might have hoped so. Stepan Trofimovitch as a father would have
indignantly rejected the insinuation that he could entertain such a hope.
Anyway queer rumours had hitherto been reaching us about Petrusha. To begin
with, on completing his studies at the university six years before, he had hung
about in Petersburg without getting work. Suddenly we got the news that he had
taken part in issuing some anonymous manifesto and that he was implicated in
the affair. Then he suddenly turned up abroad in Switzerland at Geneva--he had
escaped, very likely.

"It's surprising to me," Stepan Trofimovitch commented, greatly disconcerted.
"Petrusha, _c'est une si pauvre tête!_ He's good, noble-hearted, very
sensitive, and I was so delighted with him in Petersburg, comparing him with
the young people of to-day. But _c'est un pauvre sire, tout de même_.... And
you know it all comes from that same half-bakedness, that sentimentality. They
are fascinated, not by realism, but by the emotional ideal side of socialism,
by the religious note in it, so to say, by the poetry of it... second-hand, of
course. And for me, for me, think what it means! I have so many enemies here
and more still _there_, they'll put it down to the father's influence. Good
God! Petrusha a revolutionist! What times we live in!"

Very soon, however, Petrusha sent his exact address from Switzerland for money
to be sent him as usual; so he could not be exactly an exile. And now, after
four years abroad, he was suddenly making his appearance again in his own
country, and announced that he would arrive shortly, so there could be no
charge against him. What was more, someone seemed to be interested in him and
protecting him. He wrote now from the south of Russia, where he was busily
engaged in some private but important business. All this was capital, but where
was his father to get that other seven or eight thousand, to make up a suitable
price for the estate? And what if there should be an outcry, and instead of
that imposing picture it should come to a lawsuit? Something told Stepan
Trofimovitch that the sensitive Petrusha would not relinquish anything that was
to his interest. "Why is it--as I've noticed," Stepan Trofimovitch whispered to
me once, "why is it that all these desperate socialists and communists are at
the same time such incredible skinflints, so avaricious, so keen over property,
and, in fact, the more socialistic, the more extreme they are, the keener they
are over property... why is it? Can that, too, come from sentimentalism?" I
don't know whether there is any truth in this observation of Stepan
Trofimovitch's. I only know that Petrusha had somehow got wind of the sale of
the woods and the rest of it, and that Stepan Trofimovitch was aware of the
fact. I happened, too, to read some of Petrusha's letters to his father. He
wrote extremely rarely, once a year, or even less often. Only recently, to
inform him of his approaching visit, he had sent two letters, one almost
immediately after the other. All his letters were short, dry, consisting only
of instructions, and as the father and son had, since their meeting in
Petersburg, adopted the fashionable "thou" and "thee," Petrusha's letters had a
striking resemblance to the missives that used to be sent by landowners of the
old school from the town to their serfs whom they had left in charge of their
estates. And now suddenly this eight thousand which would solve the difficulty
would be wafted to him by Varvara Petrovna's proposition. And at the same time
she made him distinctly feel that it never could be wafted to him from anywhere
else. Of course Stepan Trofimovitch consented.

He sent for me directly she had gone and shut himself up for the whole day,
admitting no one else. He cried, of course, talked well and talked a great
deal, contradicted himself continually, made a casual pun, and was much pleased
with it. Then he had a slight attack of his "summer cholera"--everything in
fact followed the usual course. Then he brought out the portrait of his German
bride, now twenty years deceased, and began plaintively appealing to her: "Will
you forgive me?" In fact he seemed somehow distracted. Our grief led us to get
a little drunk. He soon fell into a sweet sleep, however. Next morning he tied
his cravat in masterly fashion, dressed with care, and went frequently to look
at himself in the glass. He sprinkled his handkerchief with scent, only a
slight dash of it, however, and as soon as he saw Varvara Petrovna out of the
window he hurriedly took another handkerchief and hid the scented one under the
pillow.

"Excellent!" Varvara Petrovna approved, on receiving his consent. "In the first
place you show a fine decision, and secondly you've listened to the voice of
reason, to which you generally pay so little heed in your private affairs.
There's no need of haste, however," she added, scanning the knot of his white
tie, "for the present say nothing, and I will say nothing. It will soon be your
birthday; I will come to see you with her. Give us tea in the evening, and
please without wine or other refreshments, but I'll arrange it all myself.
Invite your friends, but we'll make the list together. You can talk to her the
day before, if necessary. And at your party we won't exactly announce it, or
make an engagement of any sort, but only hint at it, and let people know
without any sort of ceremony. And then the wedding a fortnight later, as far as
possible without any fuss.... You two might even go away for a time after the
wedding, to Moscow, for instance. I'll go with you, too, perhaps... The chief
thing is, keep quiet till then."

Stepan Trofimovitch was surprised. He tried to falter that he could not do like
that, that he must talk it over with his bride. But Varvara Petrovna flew at
him in exasperation.

"What for? In the first place it may perhaps come to nothing."

"Come to nothing!" muttered the bridegroom, utterly dumbfoundered.

"Yes. I'll see.... But everything shall be as I've told you, and don't be
uneasy. I'll prepare her myself. There's really no need for you. Everything
necessary shall be said and done, and there's no need for you to meddle. Why
should you? In what character? Don't come and don't write letters. And not a
sight or sound of you, I beg. I will be silent too."

She absolutely refused to explain herself, and went away, obviously upset.
Stepan Trofimovitch's excessive readiness evidently impressed her. Alas! he was
utterly unable to grasp his position, and the question had not yet presented
itself to him from certain other points of view. On the contrary a new note was
apparent in him, a sort of conquering and jaunty air. He swaggered.

"I do like that!" he exclaimed, standing before me, and flinging wide his arms.
"Did you hear? She wants to drive me to refusing at last. Why, I may lose
patience, too, and... refuse! 'Sit still, there's no need for you to go to
her.' But after all, why should I be married? Simply because she's taken an
absurd fancy into her heart. But I'm a serious man, and I can refuse to submit
to the idle whims of a giddy-woman! I have duties to my son and...and to
myself! I'm making a sacrifice. Does she realise that? I have agreed, perhaps,
because I am weary of life and nothing matters to me. But she may exasperate
me, and then it will matter. I shall resent it and refuse. _Et enfin, le
ridicule_...what will they say at the club? What will... what will... Laputin
say? 'Perhaps nothing will come of it'--what a thing to say! That beats
everything. That's really... what is one to say to that?... _Je suis un forçat,
un Badinguet, un_ man pushed to the wall...."

And at the same time a sort of capricious complacency, something frivolous and
playful, could be seen in the midst of all these plaintive exclamations. In the
evening we drank too much again.

