# PART II - CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY - IV
[Metadata]: # {02.06.04}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.04}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# IV
[TreeTag]: # {02.06.04.01}
Though Pyotr Stepanovitch was perhaps far from being a stupid man, Fedka the
convict had said of him truly "that he would make up a man himself and go on
living with him too." He came away from Lembke fully persuaded that for the
next six days, anyway, he had put his mind at rest, and this interval was
absolutely necessary for his own purposes. But it was a false idea and founded
entirely on the fact that he had made up for himself once for all an Andrey
Antonovitch who was a perfect simpleton.

Like every morbidly suspicious man, Andrey Antonovitch was always exceedingly
and joyfully trustful the moment he got on to sure ground. The new turn of
affairs struck him at first in a rather favourable light in spite of some fresh
and troublesome complications. Anyway, his former doubts fell to the ground.
Besides, he had been so tired for the last few days, so exhausted and helpless,
that his soul involuntarily yearned for rest. But alas! he was again uneasy.
The long time he had spent in Petersburg had left ineradicable traces in his
heart. The official and even the secret history of the "younger generation" was
fairly familiar to him--he was a curious man and used to collect
manifestoes--but he could never understand a word of it. Now he felt like a man
lost in a forest. Every instinct told him that there was something in Pyotr
Stepanovitch's words utterly incongruous, anomalous, and grotesque, "though
there's no telling what may not happen with this 'younger generation,' and the
devil only knows what's going on among them," he mused, lost in perplexity.

And at this moment, to make matters worse, Blum poked his head in. He had been
waiting not far off through the whole of Pyotr Stepanovitch's visit. This Blum
was actually a distant relation of Andrey Antonovitch, though the relationship
had always been carefully and timorously concealed. I must apologise to the
reader for devoting a few words here to this insignificant person. Blum was one
of that strange class of "unfortunate" Germans who are unfortunate not through
lack of ability but through some inexplicable ill luck. "Unfortunate" Germans
are not a myth, but really do exist even in Russia, and are of a special type.
Andrey Antonovitch had always had a quite touching sympathy for him, and
wherever he could, as he rose himself in the service, had promoted him to
subordinate positions under him; but Blum had never been successful. Either the
post was abolished after he had been appointed to it, or a new chief took
charge of the department; once he was almost arrested by mistake with other
people. He was precise, but he was gloomy to excess and to his own detriment.
He was tall and had red hair; he stooped and was depressed and even
sentimental; and in spite of his being humbled by his life, he was obstinate
and persistent as an ox, though always at the wrong moment. For Andrey
Antonovitch he, as well as his wife and numerous family, had cherished for many
years a reverent devotion. Except Andrey Antonovitch no one had ever liked him.
Yulia Mihailovna would have discarded him from the first, but could not
overcome her husband's obstinacy. It was the cause of their first conjugal
quarrel. It had happened soon after their marriage, in the early days of their
honeymoon, when she was confronted with Blum, who, together with the
humiliating secret of his relationship, had been until then carefully concealed
from her. Andrey Antonovitch besought her with clasped hands, told her
pathetically all the story of Blum and their friendship from childhood, but
Yulia Mihailovna considered herself disgraced forever, and even had recourse to
fainting. Von Lembke would not budge an inch, and declared that he would not
give up Blum or part from him for anything in the world, so that she was
surprised at last and was obliged to put up with Blum. It was settled, however,
that the relationship should be concealed even more carefully than before if
possible, and that even Blum's Christian name and patronymic should be changed,
because he too was for some reason called Andrey Antonovitch. Blum knew no one
in the town except the German chemist, had not called on anyone, and led, as he
always did, a lonely and niggardly existence. He had long been aware of Andrey
Antonovitch's literary peccadilloes. He was generally summoned to listen to
secret _tête-à-tête_ readings of his novel; he would sit like a post for six
hours at a stretch, perspiring and straining his utmost to keep awake and
smile. On reaching home he would groan with his long-legged and lanky wife over
their benefactor's unhappy weakness for Russian literature.

Andrey Antonovitch looked with anguish at Blum.

"I beg you to leave me alone, Blum," he began with agitated haste, obviously
anxious to avoid any renewal of the previous conversation which had been
interrupted by Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"And yet this may be arranged in the most delicate way and with no publicity;
you have full power." Blum respectfully but obstinately insisted on some point,
stooping forward and coming nearer and nearer by small steps to Andrey
Antonovitch.

"Blum, you are so devoted to me and so anxious to serve me that I am always in
a panic when I look at you."

"You always say witty things, and sleep in peace satisfied with what you've
said, but that's how you damage yourself."

"Blum, I have just convinced myself that it's quite a mistake, quite a
mistake."

"Not from the words of that false, vicious young man whom you suspect yourself?
He has won you by his flattering praise of your talent for literature."

"Blum, you understand nothing about it; your project is absurd, I tell you. We
shall find nothing and there will be a fearful upset and laughter too, and then
Yulia Mihailovna..."

"We shall certainly find everything we are looking for." Blum advanced firmly
towards him, laying his right hand on his heart. "We will make a search
suddenly early in the morning, carefully showing every consideration for the
person himself and strictly observing all the prescribed forms of the law. The
young men, Lyamshin and Telyatnikov, assert positively that we shall find all
we want. They were constant visitors there. Nobody is favourably disposed to
Mr. Verhovensky. Madame Stavrogin has openly refused him her graces, and every
honest man, if only there is such a one in this coarse town, is persuaded that
a hotbed of infidelity and social doctrines has always been concealed there. He
keeps all the forbidden books, Ryliev's 'Reflections,' all Herzen's works.... I
have an approximate catalogue, in case of need."

"Oh heavens! Every one has these books; how simple you are, my poor Blum."

"And many manifestoes," Blum went on without heeding the observation. "We shall
end by certainly coming upon traces of the real manifestoes here. That young
Verhovensky I feel very suspicious of."

"But you are mixing up the father and the son. They are not on good terms. The
son openly laughs at his father."

"That's only a mask."

"Blum, you've sworn to torment me! Think! he is a conspicuous figure here,
after all. He's been a professor, he is a well-known man. He'll make such an
uproar and there will be such gibes all over the town, and we shall make a mess
of it all.... And only think how Yulia Mihailovna will take it." Blum pressed
forward and did not listen. "He was only a lecturer, only a lecturer, and of a
low rank when he retired." He smote himself on the chest. "He has no marks of
distinction. He was discharged from the service on suspicion of plots against
the government. He has been under secret supervision, and undoubtedly still is
so. And in view of the disorders that have come to light now, you are
undoubtedly bound in duty. You are losing your chance of distinction by letting
slip the real criminal."

"Yulia Mihailovna! Get away, Blum," Von Lembke cried suddenly, hearing the
voice of his spouse in the next room. Blum started but did not give in.

"Allow me, allow me," he persisted, pressing both hands still more tightly on
his chest.

"Get away!" hissed Andrey Antonovitch. "Do what you like... afterwards. Oh, my
God!"

The curtain was raised and Yulia Mihailovna made her appearance. She stood
still majestically at the sight of Blum, casting a haughty and offended glance
at him, as though the very presence of this man was an affront to her. Blum
respectfully made her a deep bow without speaking and, doubled up with
veneration, moved towards the door on tiptoe with his arms held a little away
from him.

Either because he really took Andrey Antonovitch's last hysterical outbreak as
a direct permission to act as he was asking, or whether he strained a point in
this case for the direct advantage of his benefactor, because he was too
confident that success would crown his efforts; anyway, as we shall see later
on, this conversation of the governor with his subordinate led to a very
surprising event which amused many people, became public property, moved Yulia
Mihailovna to fierce anger, utterly disconcerting Andrey Antonovitch and
reducing him at the crucial moment to a state of deplorable indecision.

