# PART II - CHAPTER VII. A MEETING - II
[Metadata]: # {02.07.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.07.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {02.07.02.01}
With conspicuous nonchalance Verhovensky lounged in the chair at the upper end
of the table, almost without greeting anyone. His expression was disdainful and
even haughty. Stavrogin bowed politely, but in spite of the fact that they were
all only waiting for them, everybody, as though acting on instruction, appeared
scarcely to notice them. The lady of the house turned severely to Stavrogin as
soon as he was seated.

"Stavrogin, will you have tea?"

"Please," he answered.

"Tea for Stavrogin," she commanded her sister at the samovar. "And you, will
you?" (This was to Verhovensky.)

"Of course. What a question to ask a visitor! And give me cream too; you always
give one such filthy stuff by way of tea, and with a name-day party in the
house!"

"What, you believe in keeping name-days too!" the girl-student laughed
suddenly. "We were just talking of that."

"That's stale," muttered the schoolboy at the other end of the table.

"What's stale? To disregard conventions, even the most innocent is not stale;
on the contrary, to the disgrace of every one, so far it's a novelty," the
girl-student answered instantly, darting forward on her chair. "Besides, there
are no innocent conventions," she added with intensity.

"I only meant," cried the schoolboy with tremendous excitement, "to say that
though conventions of course are stale and must be eradicated, yet about
name-days everybody knows that they are stupid and very stale to waste precious
time upon, which has been wasted already all over the world, so that it would
be as well to sharpen one's wits on something more useful...."

"You drag it out so, one can't understand what you mean," shouted the girl.

"I think that every one has a right to express an opinion as well as every one
else, and if I want to express my opinion like anybody else..."

"No one is attacking your right to give an opinion," the lady of the house
herself cut in sharply. "You were only asked not to ramble because no one can
make out what you mean."

"But allow me to remark that you are not treating me with respect. If I
couldn't fully express my thought, it's not from want of thought but from too
much thought," the schoolboy muttered, almost in despair, losing his thread
completely.

"If you don't know how to talk, you'd better keep quiet," blurted out the girl.

The schoolboy positively jumped from his chair.

"I only wanted to state," he shouted, crimson with shame and afraid to look
about him, "that you only wanted to show off your cleverness because Mr.
Stavrogin came in--so there!"

"That's a nasty and immoral idea and shows the worthlessness of your
development. I beg you not to address me again," the girl rattled off.

"Stavrogin," began the lady of the house, "they've been discussing the rights
of the family before you came--this officer here"--she nodded towards her
relation, the major--"and, of course, I am not going to worry you with such
stale nonsense, which has been dealt with long ago. But how have the rights and
duties of the family come about in the superstitious form in which they exist
at present? That's the question. What's your opinion?"

"What do you mean by 'come about'?" Stavrogin asked in his turn.

"We know, for instance, that the superstition about God came from thunder and
lightning." The girl-student rushed into the fray again, staring at Stavrogin
with her eyes almost jumping out of her head. "It's well known that primitive
man, scared by thunder and lightning, made a god of the unseen enemy, feeling
their weakness before it. But how did the superstition of the family arise? How
did the family itself arise?"

"That's not quite the same thing...." Madame Virginsky tried to check her.

"I think the answer to this question wouldn't be quite discreet," answered
Stavrogin.

"How so?" said the girl-student, craning forward suddenly. But there was an
audible titter in the group of teachers, which was at once caught up at the
other end by Lyamshin and the schoolboy and followed by a hoarse chuckle from
the major.

"You ought to write vaudevilles," Madame Virginsky observed to Stavrogin.

"It does you no credit, I don't know what your name is," the girl rapped out
with positive indignation.

"And don't you be too forward," boomed the major. "You are a young lady and you
ought to behave modestly, and you keep jumping about as though you were sitting
on a needle."

"Kindly hold your tongue and don't address me familiarly with your nasty
comparisons. I've never seen you before and I don't recognise the
relationship."

"But I am your uncle; I used to carry you about when you were a baby!"

"I don't care what babies you used to carry about. I didn't ask you to carry
me. It must have been a pleasure to you to do so, you rude officer. And allow
me to observe, don't dare to address me so familiarly, unless it's as a
fellow-citizen. I forbid you to do it, once for all."

"There, they are all like that!" cried the major, banging the table with his
fist and addressing Stavrogin, who was sitting opposite. "But, allow me, I am
fond of Liberalism and modern ideas, and I am fond of listening to clever
conversation; masculine conversation, though, I warn you. But to listen to
these women, these nightly windmills--no, that makes me ache all over! Don't
wriggle about!" he shouted to the girl, who was leaping up from her chair. "No,
it's my turn to speak, I've been insulted."

"You can't say anything yourself, and only hinder other people talking," the
lady of the house grumbled indignantly.

"No, I will have my say," said the major hotly, addressing Stavrogin. "I reckon
on you, Mr. Stavrogin, as a fresh person who has only just come on the scene,
though I haven't the honour of knowing you. Without men they'll perish like
flies--that's what I think. All their woman question is only lack of
originality. I assure you that all this woman question has been invented for
them by men in foolishness and to their own hurt. I only thank God I am not
married. There's not the slightest variety in them, they can't even invent a
simple pattern; they have to get men to invent them for them! Here I used to
carry her in my arms, used to dance the mazurka with her when she was ten years
old; to-day she's come, naturally I fly to embrace her, and at the second word
she tells me there's no God. She might have waited a little, she was in too
great a hurry! Clever people don't believe, I dare say; but that's from their
cleverness. But you, chicken, what do you know about God, I said to her. 'Some
student taught you, and if he'd taught you to light the lamp before the ikons
you would have lighted it.'"

"You keep telling lies, you are a very spiteful person. I proved to you just
now the untenability of your position," the girl answered contemptuously, as
though disdaining further explanations with such a man. "I told you just now
that we've all been taught in the Catechism if you honour your father and your
parents you will live long and have wealth. That's in the Ten Commandments. If
God thought it necessary to offer rewards for love, your God must be immoral.
That's how I proved it to you. It wasn't the second word, and it was because
you asserted your rights. It's not my fault if you are stupid and don't
understand even now. You are offended and you are spiteful--and that's what
explains all your generation."

"You're a goose!" said the major.

"And you are a fool!"

"You can call me names!"

"Excuse me, Kapiton Maximitch, you told me yourself you don't believe in God,"
Liputin piped from the other end of the table.

"What if I did say so--that's a different matter. I believe, perhaps, only not
altogether. Even if I don't believe altogether, still I don't say God ought to
be shot. I used to think about God before I left the hussars. From all the
poems you would think that hussars do nothing but carouse and drink. Yes, I did
drink, maybe, but would you believe it, I used to jump out of bed at night and
stood crossing myself before the images with nothing but my socks on, praying
to God to give me faith; for even then I couldn't be at peace as to whether
there was a God or not. It used to fret me so! In the morning, of course, one
would amuse oneself and one's faith would seem to be lost again; and in fact
I've noticed that faith always seems to be less in the daytime."

"Haven't you any cards?" asked Verhovensky, with a mighty yawn, addressing
Madame Virginsky.

"I sympathise with your question, I sympathise entirely," the girl-student
broke in hotly, flushed with indignation at the major's words.

"We are wasting precious time listening to silly talk," snapped out the lady of
the house, and she looked reprovingly at her husband.

The girl pulled herself together.

"I wanted to make a statement to the meeting concerning the sufferings of the
students and their protest, but as time is being wasted in immoral
conversation..."

"There's no such thing as moral or immoral," the schoolboy brought out, unable
to restrain himself as soon as the girl began.

"I knew that, Mr. Schoolboy, long before you were taught it."

"And I maintain," he answered savagely, "that you are a child come from
Petersburg to enlighten us all, though we know for ourselves the commandment
'honour thy father and thy mother,' which you could not repeat correctly; and
the fact that it's immoral every one in Russia knows from Byelinsky."

"Are we ever to have an end of this?" Madame Virginsky said resolutely to her
husband. As the hostess, she blushed for the ineptitude of the conversation,
especially as she noticed smiles and even astonishment among the guests who had
been invited for the first time.

"Gentlemen," said Virginsky, suddenly lifting up his voice, "if anyone wishes
to say anything more nearly connected with our business, or has any statement
to make, I call upon him to do so without wasting time."

"I'll venture to ask one question," said the lame teacher suavely. He had been
sitting particularly decorously and had not spoken till then. "I should like to
know, are we some sort of meeting, or are we simply a gathering of ordinary
mortals paying a visit? I ask simply for the sake of order and so as not to
remain in ignorance."

This "sly" question made an impression. People looked at each other, every one
expecting someone else to answer, and suddenly all, as though at a word of
command, turned their eyes to Verhovensky and Stavrogin.

"I suggest our voting on the answer to the question whether we are a meeting or
not," said Madame Virginsky.

"I entirely agree with the suggestion," Liputin chimed in, "though the question
is rather vague."

"I agree too."

"And so do I," cried voices. "I too think it would make our proceedings more in
order," confirmed Virginsky.

"To the vote then," said his wife. "Lyamshin, please sit down to the piano; you
can give your vote from there when the voting begins."

"Again!" cried Lyamshin. "I've strummed enough for you."

"I beg you most particularly, sit down and play. Don't you care to do anything
for the cause?"

"But I assure you, Arina Prohorovna, nobody is eavesdropping. It's only your
fancy. Besides, the windows are high, and people would not understand if they
did hear."

"We don't understand ourselves," someone muttered. "But I tell you one must
always be on one's guard. I mean in case there should be spies," she explained
to Verhovensky. "Let them hear from the street that we have music and a
name-day party."

"Hang it all!" Lyamshin swore, and sitting down to the piano, began strumming a
valse, banging on the keys almost with his fists, at random.

"I propose that those who want it to be a meeting should put up their right
hands," Madame Virginsky proposed.

Some put them up, others did not. Some held them up and then put them down
again and then held them up again. "Foo! I don't understand it at all," one
officer shouted. "I don't either," cried the other.

"Oh, I understand," cried a third. "If it's yes, you hold your hand up."

"But what does 'yes' mean?"

"Means a meeting."

"No, it means not a meeting."

"I voted for a meeting," cried the schoolboy to Madame Virginsky.

"Then why didn't you hold up your hand?"

"I was looking at you. You didn't hold up yours, so I didn't hold up mine."

"How stupid! I didn't hold up my hand because I proposed it. Gentlemen, now I
propose the contrary. Those who want a meeting, sit still and do nothing; those
who don't, hold up their right hands."

"Those who don't want it?" inquired the schoolboy. "Are you doing it on
purpose?" cried Madame Virginsky wrathfully.

"No. Excuse me, those who want it, or those who don't want it? For one must
know that definitely," cried two or three voices.

"Those who don't want it--those who _don't_ want it."

"Yes, but what is one to do, hold up one's hand or not hold it up if one
doesn't want it?" cried an officer.

"Ech, we are not accustomed to constitutional methods yet!" remarked the major.

"Mr. Lyamshin, excuse me, but you are thumping so that no one can hear
anything," observed the lame teacher.

"But, upon my word, Arina Prohorovna, nobody is listening, really!" cried
Lyamshin, jumping up. "I won't play! I've come to you as a visitor, not as a
drummer!"

"Gentlemen," Virginsky went on, "answer verbally, are we a meeting or not?"

"We are! We are!" was heard on all sides. "If so, there's no need to vote,
that's enough. Are you satisfied, gentlemen? Is there any need to put it to the
vote?"

"No need--no need, we understand."

"Perhaps someone doesn't want it to be a meeting?"

"No, no; we all want it."

"But what does 'meeting' mean?" cried a voice. No one answered.

"We must choose a chairman," people cried from different parts of the room.

"Our host, of course, our host!"

"Gentlemen, if so," Virginsky, the chosen chairman, began, "I propose my
original motion. If anyone wants to say anything more relevant to the subject,
or has some statement to make, let him bring it forward without loss of time."

There was a general silence. The eyes of all were turned again on Verhovensky
and Stavrogin.

"Verhovensky, have you no statement to make?" Madame Virginsky asked him
directly.

"Nothing whatever," he answered, yawning and stretching on his chair. "But I
should like a glass of brandy."

"Stavrogin, don't you want to?"

"Thank you, I don't drink."

"I mean don't you want to speak, not don't you want brandy."

"To speak, what about? No, I don't want to."

"They'll bring you some brandy," she answered Verhovensky.

The girl-student got up. She had darted up several times already.

"I have come to make a statement about the sufferings of poor students and the
means of rousing them to protest."

But she broke off. At the other end of the table a rival had risen, and all
eyes turned to him. Shigalov, the man with the long ears, slowly rose from his
seat with a gloomy and sullen air and mournfully laid on the table a thick
notebook filled with extremely small handwriting. He remained standing in
silence. Many people looked at the notebook in consternation, but Liputin,
Virginsky, and the lame teacher seemed pleased.

"I ask leave to address the meeting," Shigalov pronounced sullenly but
resolutely.

"You have leave." Virginsky gave his sanction.

The orator sat down, was silent for half a minute, and pronounced in a solemn
voice,

"Gentlemen!"

"Here's the brandy," the sister who had been pouring out tea and had gone to
fetch brandy rapped out, contemptuously and disdainfully putting the bottle
before Verhovensky, together with the wineglass which she brought in her
fingers without a tray or a plate.

The interrupted orator made a dignified pause.

"Never mind, go on, I am not listening," cried Verhovensky, pouring himself out
a glass.

"Gentlemen, asking your attention and, as you will see later, soliciting your
aid in a matter of the first importance," Shigalov began again, "I must make
some prefatory remarks."

"Arina Prohorovna, haven't you some scissors?" Pyotr Stepanovitch asked
suddenly.

"What do you want scissors for?" she asked, with wide-open eyes.

"I've forgotten to cut my nails; I've been meaning to for the last three days,"
he observed, scrutinising his long and dirty nails with unruffled composure.

Arina Prohorovna crimsoned, but Miss Virginsky seemed pleased.

"I believe I saw them just now on the window." She got up from the table, went
and found the scissors, and at once brought them. Pyotr Stepanovitch did not
even look at her, took the scissors, and set to work with them. Arina
Prohorovna grasped that these were realistic manners, and was ashamed of her
sensitiveness. People looked at one another in silence. The lame teacher looked
vindictively and enviously at Verhovensky. Shigalov went on.

"Dedicating my energies to the study of the social organisation which is in the
future to replace the present condition of things, I've come to the conviction
that all makers of social systems from ancient times up to the present year,
187-, have been dreamers, tellers of fairy-tales, fools who contradicted
themselves, who understood nothing of natural science and the strange animal
called man. Plato, Rousseau, Fourier, columns of aluminium, are only fit for
sparrows and not for human society. But, now that we are all at last preparing
to act, a new form of social organisation is essential. In order to avoid
further uncertainty, I propose my own system of world-organisation. Here it
is." He tapped the notebook. "I wanted to expound my views to the meeting in
the most concise form possible, but I see that I should need to add a great
many verbal explanations, and so the whole exposition would occupy at least ten
evenings, one for each of my chapters." (There was the sound of laughter.) "I
must add, besides, that my system is not yet complete." (Laughter again.) "I am
perplexed by my own data and my conclusion is a direct contradiction of the
original idea with which I start. Starting from unlimited freedom, I arrive at
unlimited despotism. I will add, however, that there can be no solution of the
social problem but mine."

The laughter grew louder and louder, but it came chiefly from the younger and
less initiated visitors. There was an expression of some annoyance on the faces
of Madame Virginsky, Liputin, and the lame teacher.

"If you've been unsuccessful in making your system consistent, and have been
reduced to despair yourself, what could we do with it?" one officer observed
warily.

"You are right, Mr. Officer"--Shigalov turned sharply to him--"especially in
using the word despair. Yes, I am reduced to despair. Nevertheless, nothing can
take the place of the system set forth in my book, and there is no other way
out of it; no one can invent anything else. And so I hasten without loss of
time to invite the whole society to listen for ten evenings to my book and then
give their opinions of it. If the members are unwilling to listen to me, let us
break up from the start--the men to take up service under government, the women
to their cooking; for if you reject my solution you'll find no other, none
whatever! If they let the opportunity slip, it will simply be their loss, for
they will be bound to come back to it again."

There was a stir in the company. "Is he mad, or what?" voices asked.

"So the whole point lies in Shigalov's despair," Lyamshin commented, "and the
essential question is whether he must despair or not?"

"Shigalov's being on the brink of despair is a personal question," declared the
schoolboy.

"I propose we put it to the vote how far Shigalov's despair affects the common
cause, and at the same time whether it's worth while listening to him or not,"
an officer suggested gaily.

"That's not right." The lame teacher put in his spoke at last. As a rule he
spoke with a rather mocking smile, so that it was difficult to make out whether
he was in earnest or joking. "That's not right, gentlemen. Mr. Shigalov is too
much devoted to his task and is also too modest. I know his book. He suggests
as a final solution of the question the division of mankind into two unequal
parts. One-tenth enjoys absolute liberty and unbounded power over the other
nine-tenths. The others have to give up all individuality and become, so to
speak, a herd, and, through boundless submission, will by a series of
regenerations attain primæval innocence, something like the Garden of Eden.
They'll have to work, however. The measures proposed by the author for
depriving nine-tenths of mankind of their freedom and transforming them into a
herd through the education of whole generations are very remarkable, founded on
the facts of nature and highly logical. One may not agree with some of the
deductions, but it would be difficult to doubt the intelligence and knowledge
of the author. It's a pity that the time required--ten evenings--is impossible
to arrange for, or we might hear a great deal that's interesting."

"Can you be in earnest?" Madame Virginsky addressed the lame gentleman with a
shade of positive uneasiness in her voice, "when that man doesn't know what to
do with people and so turns nine-tenths of them into slaves? I've suspected him
for a long time."

"You say that of your own brother?" asked the lame man.

"Relationship? Are you laughing at me?"

"And besides, to work for aristocrats and to obey them as though they were gods
is contemptible!" observed the girl-student fiercely.

"What I propose is not contemptible; it's paradise, an earthly paradise, and
there can be no other on earth," Shigalov pronounced authoritatively.

"For my part," said Lyamshin, "if I didn't know what to do with nine-tenths of
mankind, I'd take them and blow them up into the air instead of putting them in
paradise. I'd only leave a handful of educated people, who would live happily
ever afterwards on scientific principles."

"No one but a buffoon can talk like that!" cried the girl, flaring up.

"He is a buffoon, but he is of use," Madame Virginsky whispered to her.

"And possibly that would be the best solution of the problem," said Shigalov,
turning hotly to Lyamshin. "You certainly don't know what a profound thing
you've succeeded in saying, my merry friend. But as it's hardly possible to
carry out your idea, we must confine ourselves to an earthly paradise, since
that's what they call it."

"This is pretty thorough rot," broke, as though involuntarily, from
Verhovensky. Without even raising his eyes, however, he went on cutting his
nails with perfect nonchalance.

"Why is it rot?" The lame man took it up instantly, as though he had been lying
in wait for his first words to catch at them. "Why is it rot? Mr. Shigalov is
somewhat fanatical in his love for humanity, but remember that Fourier, still
more Cabet and even Proudhon himself, advocated a number of the most despotic
and even fantastic measures. Mr. Shigalov is perhaps far more sober in his
suggestions than they are. I assure you that when one reads his book it's
almost impossible not to agree with some things. He is perhaps less far from
realism than anyone and his earthly paradise is almost the real one--if it ever
existed--for the loss of which man is always sighing."

"I knew I was in for something," Verhovensky muttered again.

"Allow me," said the lame man, getting more and more excited. "Conversations
and arguments about the future organisation of society are almost an actual
necessity for all thinking people nowadays. Herzen was occupied with nothing
else all his life. Byelinsky, as I know on very good authority, used to spend
whole evenings with his friends debating and settling beforehand even the
minutest, so to speak, domestic, details of the social organisation of the
future."

"Some people go crazy over it," the major observed suddenly.

"We are more likely to arrive at something by talking, anyway, than by sitting
silent and posing as dictators," Liputin hissed, as though at last venturing to
begin the attack.

"I didn't mean Shigalov when I said it was rot," Verhovensky mumbled. "You see,
gentlemen,"--he raised his eyes a trifle--"to my mind all these books, Fourier,
Cabet, all this talk about the right to work, and Shigalov's theories--are all
like novels of which one can write a hundred thousand--an æsthetic
entertainment. I can understand that in this little town you are bored, so you
rush to ink and paper."

"Excuse me," said the lame man, wriggling on his chair, "though we are
provincials and of course objects of commiseration on that ground, yet we know
that so far nothing has happened in the world new enough to be worth our
weeping at having missed it. It is suggested to us in various pamphlets made
abroad and secretly distributed that we should unite and form groups with the
sole object of bringing about universal destruction. It's urged that, however
much you tinker with the world, you can't make a good job of it, but that by
cutting off a hundred million heads and so lightening one's burden, one can
jump over the ditch more safely. A fine idea, no doubt, but quite as
impracticable as Shigalov's theories, which you referred to just now so
contemptuously."

"Well, but I haven't come here for discussion." Verhovensky let drop this
significant phrase, and, as though quite unaware of his blunder, drew the
candle nearer to him that he might see better.

"It's a pity, a great pity, that you haven't come for discussion, and it's a
great pity that you are so taken up just now with your toilet."

"What's my toilet to you?"

"To remove a hundred million heads is as difficult as to transform the world by
propaganda. Possibly more difficult, especially in Russia," Liputin ventured
again.

"It's Russia they rest their hopes on now," said an officer.

"We've heard they are resting their hopes on it," interposed the lame man. "We
know that a mysterious finger is pointing to our delightful country as the land
most fitted to accomplish the great task. But there's this: by the gradual
solution of the problem by propaganda I shall gain something, anyway--I shall
have some pleasant talk, at least, and shall even get some recognition from
government for my services to the cause of society. But in the second way, by
the rapid method of cutting off a hundred million heads, what benefit shall I
get personally? If you began advocating that, your tongue might be cut out."

"Yours certainly would be," observed Verhovensky.

"You see. And as under the most favourable circumstances you would not get
through such a massacre in less than fifty or at the best thirty years--for
they are not sheep, you know, and perhaps they would not let themselves be
slaughtered--wouldn't it be better to pack one's bundle and migrate to some
quiet island beyond calm seas and there close one's eyes tranquilly? Believe
me"--he tapped the table significantly with his finger--"you will only promote
emigration by such propaganda and nothing else!"

He finished evidently triumphant. He was one of the intellects of the province.
Liputin smiled slyly, Virginsky listened rather dejectedly, the others followed
the discussion with great attention, especially the ladies and officers. They
all realised that the advocate of the hundred million heads theory had been
driven into a corner, and waited to see what would come of it.

"That was a good saying of yours, though," Verhovensky mumbled more carelessly
than ever, in fact with an air of positive boredom. "Emigration is a good idea.
But all the same, if in spite of all the obvious disadvantages you foresee,
more and more come forward every day ready to fight for the common cause, it
will be able to do without you. It's a new religion, my good friend, coming to
take the place of the old one. That's why so many fighters come forward, and
it's a big movement. You'd better emigrate! And, you know, I should advise
Dresden, not 'the calm islands.' To begin with, it's a town that has never been
visited by an epidemic, and as you are a man of culture, no doubt you are
afraid of death. Another thing, it's near the Russian frontier, so you can more
easily receive your income from your beloved Fatherland. Thirdly, it contains
what are called treasures of art, and you are a man of æsthetic tastes,
formerly a teacher of literature, I believe. And, finally, it has a miniature
Switzerland of its own--to provide you with poetic inspiration, for no doubt
you write verse. In fact it's a treasure in a nutshell!" There was a general
movement, especially among the officers. In another instant they would have all
begun talking at once. But the lame man rose irritably to the bait.

"No, perhaps I am not going to give up the common cause. You must understand
that..."

"What, would you join the quintet if I proposed it to you?" Verhovensky boomed
suddenly, and he laid down the scissors.

Every one seemed startled. The mysterious man had revealed himself too freely.
He had even spoken openly of the "quintet."

"Every one feels himself to be an honest man and will not shirk his part in the
common cause"--the lame man tried to wriggle out of it--"but..."

"No, this is not a question which allows of a _but_," Verhovensky interrupted
harshly and peremptorily. "I tell you, gentlemen, I must have a direct answer.
I quite understand that, having come here and having called you together
myself, I am bound to give you explanations" (again an unexpected revelation),
"but I can give you none till I know what is your attitude to the subject. To
cut the matter short--for we can't go on talking for another thirty years as
people have done for the last thirty--I ask you which you prefer: the slow way,
which consists in the composition of socialistic romances and the academic
ordering of the destinies of humanity a thousand years hence, while despotism
will swallow the savoury morsels which would almost fly into your mouths of
themselves if you'd take a little trouble; or do you, whatever it may imply,
prefer a quicker way which will at last untie your hands, and will let humanity
make its own social organisation in freedom and in action, not on paper? They
shout 'a hundred million heads'; that may be only a metaphor; but why be afraid
of it if, with the slow day-dream on paper, despotism in the course of some
hundred years will devour not a hundred but five hundred million heads? Take
note too that an incurable invalid will not be cured whatever prescriptions are
written for him on paper. On the contrary, if there is delay, he will grow so
corrupt that he will infect us too and contaminate all the fresh forces which
one might still reckon upon now, so that we shall all at last come to grief
together. I thoroughly agree that it's extremely agreeable to chatter liberally
and eloquently, but action is a little trying.... However, I am no hand at
talking; I came here with communications, and so I beg all the honourable
company not to vote, but simply and directly to state which you prefer: walking
at a snail's pace in the marsh, or putting on full steam to get across it?"

"I am certainly for crossing at full steam!" cried the schoolboy in an ecstasy.

"So am I," Lyamshin chimed in.

"There can be no doubt about the choice," muttered an officer, followed by
another, then by someone else. What struck them all most was that Verhovensky
had come "with communications" and had himself just promised to speak.

"Gentlemen, I see that almost all decide for the policy of the manifestoes," he
said, looking round at the company.

"All, all!" cried the majority of voices.

"I confess I am rather in favour of a more humane policy," said the major, "but
as all are on the other side, I go with all the rest."

"It appears, then, that even you are not opposed to it," said Verhovensky,
addressing the lame man.

"I am not exactly..." said the latter, turning rather red, "but if I do agree
with the rest now, it's simply not to break up--"

"You are all like that! Ready to argue for six months to practise your Liberal
eloquence and in the end you vote the same as the rest! Gentlemen, consider
though, is it true that you are all ready?"

(Ready for what? The question was vague, but very alluring.)

"All are, of course!" voices were heard. But all were looking at one another.

"But afterwards perhaps you will resent having agreed so quickly? That's almost
always the way with you."

The company was excited in various ways, greatly excited. The lame man flew at
him.

"Allow me to observe, however, that answers to such questions are conditional.
Even if we have given our decision, you must note that questions put in such a
strange way..."

"In what strange way?"

"In a way such questions are not asked."

"Teach me how, please. But do you know, I felt sure you'd be the first to take
offence."

"You've extracted from us an answer as to our readiness for immediate action;
but what right had you to do so? By what authority do you ask such questions?"

"You should have thought of asking that question sooner! Why did you answer?
You agree and then you go back on it!"

"But to my mind the irresponsibility of your principal question suggests to me
that you have no authority, no right, and only asked from personal curiosity."

"What do you mean? What do you mean?" cried Verhovensky, apparently beginning
to be much alarmed.

"Why, that the initiation of new members into anything you like is done,
anyway, _tête-à-tête_ and not in the company of twenty people one doesn't
know!" blurted out the lame man. He had said all that was in his mind because
he was too irritated to restrain himself. Verhovensky turned to the general
company with a capitally simulated look of alarm.

"Gentlemen, I deem it my duty to declare that all this is folly, and that our
conversation has gone too far. I have so far initiated no one, and no one has
the right to say of me that I initiate members. We were simply discussing our
opinions. That's so, isn't it? But whether that's so or not, you alarm me very
much." He turned to the lame man again. "I had no idea that it was unsafe here
to speak of such practically innocent matters except _tête-à-tête_. Are you
afraid of informers? Can there possibly be an informer among us here?"

The excitement became tremendous; all began talking.

"Gentlemen, if that is so," Verhovensky went on, "I have compromised myself
more than anyone, and so I will ask you to answer one question, if you care to,
of course. You are all perfectly free."

"What question? What question?" every one clamoured.

"A question that will make it clear whether we are to remain together, or take
up our hats and go our several ways without speaking."

"The question! The question!"

"If any one of us knew of a proposed political murder, would he, in view of all
the consequences, go to give information, or would he stay at home and await
events? Opinions may differ on this point. The answer to the question will tell
us clearly whether we are to separate, or to remain together and for far longer
than this one evening. Let me appeal to you first." He turned to the lame man.

"Why to me first?"

"Because you began it all. Be so good as not to prevaricate; it won't help you
to be cunning. But please yourself, it's for you to decide."

"Excuse me, but such a question is positively insulting."

"No, can't you be more exact than that?"

"I've never been an agent of the Secret Police," replied the latter, wriggling
more than ever.

"Be so good as to be more definite, don't keep us waiting."

The lame man was so furious that he left off answering. Without a word he
glared wrathfully from under his spectacles at his tormentor.

"Yes or no? Would you inform or not?" cried Verhovensky.

"Of course I wouldn't," the lame man shouted twice as loudly.

"And no one would, of course not!" cried many voices.

"Allow me to appeal to you, Mr. Major. Would you inform or not?" Verhovensky
went on. "And note that I appeal to you on purpose."

"I won't inform."

"But if you knew that someone meant to rob and murder someone else, an ordinary
mortal, then you would inform and give warning?"

"Yes, of course; but that's a private affair, while the other would be a
political treachery. I've never been an agent of the Secret Police."

"And no one here has," voices cried again. "It's an unnecessary question. Every
one will make the same answer. There are no informers here."

"What is that gentleman getting up for?" cried the girl-student.

"That's Shatov. What are you getting up for?" cried the lady of the house.

Shatov did, in fact, stand up. He was holding his cap in his hand and looking
at Verhovensky. Apparently he wanted to say something to him, but was
hesitating. His face was pale and wrathful, but he controlled himself. He did
not say one word, but in silence walked towards the door.

"Shatov, this won't make things better for you!" Verhovensky called after him
enigmatically.

"But it will for you, since you are a spy and a scoundrel!" Shatov shouted to
him from the door, and he went out.

Shouts and exclamations again.

"That's what comes of a test," cried a voice.

"It's been of use," cried another.

"Hasn't it been of use too late?" observed a third.

"Who invited him? Who let him in? Who is he? Who is Shatov? Will he inform, or
won't he?" There was a shower of questions.

"If he were an informer he would have kept up appearances instead of cursing it
all and going away," observed someone.

"See, Stavrogin is getting up too. Stavrogin has not answered the question
either," cried the girl-student.

Stavrogin did actually stand up, and at the other end of the table Kirillov
rose at the same time.

"Excuse me, Mr. Stavrogin," Madame Virginsky addressed him sharply, "we all
answered the question, while you are going away without a word."

"I see no necessity to answer the question which interests you," muttered
Stavrogin.

"But we've compromised ourselves and you won't," shouted several voices.

"What business is it of mine if you have compromised yourselves?" laughed
Stavrogin, but his eyes flashed.

"What business? What business?" voices exclaimed.

Many people got up from their chairs.

"Allow me, gentlemen, allow me," cried the lame man. "Mr. Verhovensky hasn't
answered the question either; he has only asked it."

The remark produced a striking effect. All looked at one another. Stavrogin
laughed aloud in the lame man's face and went out; Kirillov followed him;
Verhovensky ran after them into the passage.

"What are you doing?" he faltered, seizing Stavrogin's hand and gripping it
with all his might in his. Stavrogin pulled away his hand without a word.

"Be at Kirillov's directly, I'll come.... It's absolutely necessary for me to
see you!..."

"It isn't necessary for me," Stavrogin cut him short.

"Stavrogin will be there," Kirillov said finally. "Stavrogin, it is necessary
for you. I will show you that there."

They went out.

