# PART III - CHAPTER II. THE END OF THE FETE - I
[Metadata]: # {03.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {03.02.01.01}
HE WOULD NOT SEE ME. He had shut himself up and was writing. At my repeated
knocks and appeals he answered through the door:

"My friend, I have finished everything. Who can ask anything more of me?"

"You haven't finished anything, you've only helped to make a mess of the whole
thing. For God's sake, no epigrams, Stepan Trofimovitch! Open the door. We must
take steps; they may still come and insult you...."

I thought myself entitled to be particularly severe and even rigorous. I was
afraid he might be going to do something still more mad. But to my surprise I
met an extraordinary firmness.

"Don't be the first to insult me then. I thank you for the past, but I repeat
I've done with all men, good and bad. I am writing to Darya Pavlovna, whom I've
forgotten so unpardonably till now. You may take it to her to-morrow, if you
like, now _merci_."

"Stepan Trofimovitch, I assure you that the matter is more serious than you
think. Do you think that you've crushed someone there? You've pulverised no
one, but have broken yourself to pieces like an empty bottle." (Oh, I was
coarse and discourteous, I remember it with regret.) "You've absolutely no
reason to write to Darya Pavlovna... and what will you do with yourself without
me? What do you understand about practical life? I expect you are plotting
something else? You'll simply come to grief again if you go plotting something
more...."

He rose and came close up to the door.

"You've not been long with them, but you've caught the infection of their tone
and language. _Dieu vous pardonne, mon ami, et Dieu vous garde._ But I've
always seen in you the germs of delicate feeling, and you will get over it
perhaps--_après le temps,_ of course, like all of us Russians. As for what you
say about my impracticability, I'll remind you of a recent idea of mine: a
whole mass of people in Russia do nothing whatever but attack other people's
impracticability with the utmost fury and with the tiresome persistence of
flies in the summer, accusing every one of it except themselves. _Cher,_
remember that I am excited, and don't distress me. Once more _merci_ for
everything, and let us part like Karmazinov and the public; that is, let us
forget each other with as much generosity as we can. He was posing in begging
his former readers so earnestly to forget him; _quant à moi,_ I am not so
conceited, and I rest my hopes on the youth of your inexperienced heart. How
should you remember a useless old man for long? 'Live more,' my friend, as
Nastasya wished me on my last name-day _(ces pauvres gens ont quelquefois des
mots charmants et pleins de philosophie)._ I do not wish you much happiness--it
will bore you. I do not wish you trouble either, but, following the philosophy
of the peasant, I will repeat simply 'live more' and try not to be much bored;
this useless wish I add from myself. Well, good-bye, and good-bye for good.
Don't stand at my door, I will not open it."

He went away and I could get nothing more out of him. In spite of his
"excitement," he spoke smoothly, deliberately, with weight, obviously trying to
be impressive. Of course he was rather vexed with me and was avenging himself
indirectly, possibly even for the yesterday's "prison carts" and "floors that
give way." His tears in public that morning, in spite of a triumph of a sort,
had put him, he knew, in rather a comic position, and there never was a man
more solicitous of dignity and punctilio in his relations with his friends than
Stepan Trofimovitch. Oh, I don't blame him. But this fastidiousness and irony
which he preserved in spite of all shocks reassured me at the time. A man who
was so little different from his ordinary self was, of course, not in the mood
at that moment for anything tragic or extraordinary. So I reasoned at the time,
and, heavens, what a mistake I made! I left too much out of my reckoning.

In anticipation of events I will quote the few first lines of the letter to
Darya Pavlovna, which she actually received the following day:

"_Mon enfant,_ my hand trembles, but I've done with everything. You were not
present at my last struggle: you did not come to that matinée, and you did well
to stay away. But you will be told that in our Russia, which has grown so poor
in men of character, one man had the courage to stand up and, in spite of
deadly menaces showered on him from all sides, to tell the fools the truth,
that is, that they are fools. _Oh, ce sont--des pauvres petits vauriens et rien
de plus, des petits_--fools--_voilà le mot!_ The die is cast; I am going from
this town forever and I know not whither. Every one I loved has turned from me.
But you, you are a pure and naïve creature; you, a gentle being whose life has
been all but linked with mine at the will of a capricious and imperious heart;
you who looked at me perhaps with contempt when I shed weak tears on the eve of
our frustrated marriage; you, who cannot in any case look on me except as a
comic figure--for you, for you is the last cry of my heart, for you my last
duty, for you alone! I cannot leave you forever thinking of me as an ungrateful
fool, a churlish egoist, as probably a cruel and ungrateful heart--whom, alas,
I cannot forget--is every day describing me to you...."

And so on and so on, four large pages.

Answering his "I won't open" with three bangs with my fist on the door, and
shouting after him that I was sure he would send Nastasya for me three times
that day, but I would not come, I gave him up and ran off to Yulia Mihailovna.

