# PART II - CHAPTER III. THE DUEL - I
[Metadata]: # {02.03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.03.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER III. THE DUEL
I
# I
THE NEXT DAY, at two o'clock in the afternoon, the duel took place as arranged.
Things were hastened forward by Gaganov's obstinate desire to fight at all
costs. He did not understand his adversary's conduct, and was in a fury. For a
whole month he had been insulting him with impunity, and had so far been unable
to make him lose patience. What he wanted was a challenge on the part of
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, as he had not himself any direct pretext for
challenging him. His secret motive for it, that is, his almost morbid hatred of
Stavrogin for the insult to his family four years before, he was for some
reason ashamed to confess. And indeed he regarded this himself as an impossible
pretext for a challenge, especially in view of the humble apology offered by
Nikolay Stavrogin twice already. He privately made up his mind that Stavrogin
was a shameless coward; and could not understand how he could have accepted
Shatov's blow. So he made up his mind at last to send him the extraordinarily
rude letter that had finally roused Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch himself to propose
a meeting. Having dispatched this letter the day before, he awaited a challenge
with feverish impatience, and while morbidly reckoning the chances at one
moment with hope and at the next with despair, he got ready for any emergency
by securing a second, to wit, Mavriky Nikolaevitch Drozdov, who was a friend of
his, an old schoolfellow, a man for whom he had a great respect. So when
Kirillov came next morning at nine o'clock with his message he found things in
readiness. All the apologies and unheard-of condescension of Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch were at once, at the first word, rejected with extraordinary
exasperation. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had only been made acquainted with the
position of affairs the evening before, opened his mouth with surprise at such
incredible concessions, and would have urged a reconciliation, but seeing that
Gaganov, guessing his intention, was almost trembling in his chair, refrained,
and said nothing. If it had not been for the promise given to his old
schoolfellow he would have retired immediately; he only remained in the hope of
being some help on the scene of action. Kirillov repeated the challenge. All
the conditions of the encounter made by Stavrogin were accepted on the spot,
without the faintest objection. Only one addition was made, and that a
ferocious one. If the first shots had no decisive effect, they were to fire
again, and if the second encounter were inconclusive, it was to be followed by
a third. Kirillov frowned, objected to the third encounter, but gaining nothing
by his efforts agreed on the condition, however, that three should be the
limit, and that "a fourth encounter was out of the question." This was
conceded. Accordingly at two o'clock in the afternoon the meeting took place at
Brykov, that is, in a little copse in the outskirts of the town, lying between
Skvoreshniki and the Shpigulin factory. The rain of the previous night was
over, but it was damp, grey, and windy. Low, ragged, dingy clouds moved rapidly
across the cold sky. The tree-tops roared with a deep droning sound, and
creaked on their roots; it was a melancholy morning.

Mavriky Nikolaevitch and Gaganov arrived on the spot in a smart char-à-banc
with a pair of horses driven by the latter. They were accompanied by a groom.
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and Kirillov arrived almost at the same instant. They
were not driving, they were on horseback, and were also followed by a mounted
servant. Kirillov, who had never mounted a horse before, sat up boldly, erect
in the saddle, grasping in his right hand the heavy box of pistols which he
would not entrust to the servant. In his inexperience he was continually with
his left hand tugging at the reins, which made the horse toss his head and show
an inclination to rear. This, however, seemed to cause his rider no uneasiness.
Gaganov, who was morbidly suspicious and always ready to be deeply offended,
considered their coming on horseback as a fresh insult to himself, inasmuch as
it showed that his opponents were too confident of success, since they had not
even thought it necessary to have a carriage in case of being wounded and
disabled. He got out of his char-à-banc, yellow with anger, and felt that his
hands were trembling, as he told Mavriky Nikolaevitch. He made no response at
all to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's bow, and turned away. The seconds cast lots.
The lot fell on Kirillov's pistols. They measured out the barrier and placed
the combatants. The servants with the carriage and horses were moved back three
hundred paces. The weapons were loaded and handed to the combatants.

I'm sorry that I have to tell my story more quickly and have no time for
descriptions. But I can't refrain from some comments. Mavriky Nikolaevitch was
melancholy and preoccupied. Kirillov, on the other hand, was perfectly calm and
unconcerned, very exact over the details of the duties he had undertaken, but
without the slightest fussiness or even curiosity as to the issue of the
fateful contest that was so near at hand. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was paler
than usual. He was rather lightly dressed in an overcoat and a white beaver
hat. He seemed very tired, he frowned from time to time, and seemed to feel it
superfluous to conceal his ill-humour. But Gaganov was at this moment more
worthy of mention than anyone, so that it is quite impossible not to say a few
words about him in particular.

