# PART III - CHAPTER IV. THE LAST RESOLUTION - IV
[Metadata]: # {03.04.04}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.04}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER IV. THE LAST RESOLUTION
IV
# IV
He had long had a passport in readiness made out in a false name. It seems a
wild idea that this prudent little man, the petty despot of his family, who
was, above all things, a sharp man of business and a capitalist, and who was an
official too (though he was a Fourierist), should long before have conceived
the fantastic project of procuring this passport in case of emergency, that he
might escape abroad by means of it _if_... he did admit the possibility of this
if, though no doubt he was never able himself to formulate what this _if_ might
mean.

But now it suddenly formulated itself, and in a most unexpected way. That
desperate idea with which he had gone to Kirillov's after that "fool" he had
heard from Pyotr Stepanovitch on the pavement, had been to abandon everything
at dawn next day and to emigrate abroad. If anyone doubts that such fantastic
incidents occur in everyday Russian life, even now, let him look into the
biographies of all the Russian exiles abroad. Not one of them escaped with more
wisdom or real justification. It has always been the unrestrained domination of
phantoms and nothing more.

Running home, he began by locking himself in, getting out his travelling bag,
and feverishly beginning to pack. His chief anxiety was the question of money,
and how much he could rescue from the impending ruin--and by what means. He
thought of it as "rescuing," for it seemed to him that he could not linger an
hour, and that by daylight he must be on the high road. He did not know where
to take the train either; he vaguely determined to take it at the second or
third big station from the town, and to make his way there on foot, if
necessary. In that way, instinctively and mechanically he busied himself in his
packing with a perfect whirl of ideas in his head--and suddenly stopped short,
gave it all up, and with a deep groan stretched himself on the sofa.

He felt clearly, and suddenly realised that he might escape, but that he was by
now utterly incapable of deciding whether he ought to make off _before or
after_ Shatov's death; that he was simply a lifeless body, a crude inert mass;
that he was being moved by an awful outside power; and that, though he had a
passport to go abroad, that though he could run away from Shatov (otherwise
what need was there of such haste?), yet he would run away, not from Shatov,
not before his murder, but _after_ it, and that that was determined, signed,
and sealed.

In insufferable distress, trembling every instant and wondering at himself,
alternately groaning aloud and numb with terror, he managed to exist till
eleven o'clock next morning locked in and lying on the sofa; then came the
shock he was awaiting, and it at once determined him. When he unlocked his door
and went out to his household at eleven o'clock they told him that the runaway
convict and brigand, Fedka, who was a terror to every one, who had pillaged
churches and only lately been guilty of murder and arson, who was being pursued
and could not be captured by our police, had been found at daybreak murdered,
five miles from the town, at a turning off the high road, and that the whole
town was talking of it already. He rushed headlong out of the house at once to
find out further details, and learned, to begin with, that Fedka, who had been
found with his skull broken, had apparently been robbed and, secondly, that the
police already had strong suspicion and even good grounds for believing that
the murderer was one of the Shpigulin men called Fomka, the very one who had
been his accomplice in murdering the Lebyadkins and setting fire to their
house, and that there had been a quarrel between them on the road about a large
sum of money stolen from Lebyadkin, which Fedka was supposed to have hidden.
Liputin ran to Pyotr Stepanovitch's lodgings and succeeded in learning at the
back door, on the sly, that though Pyotr Stepanovitch had not returned home
till about one o'clock at night, he had slept there quietly all night till
eight o'clock next morning. Of course, there could be no doubt that there was
nothing extraordinary about Fedka's death, and that such careers usually have
such an ending; but the coincidence of the fatal words that "it was the last
time Fedka would drink vodka," with the prompt fulfilment of the prediction,
was so remarkable that Liputin no longer hesitated. The shock had been given;
it was as though a stone had fallen upon him and crushed him forever. Returning
home, he thrust his travelling-bag under the bed without a word, and in the
evening at the hour fixed he was the first to appear at the appointed spot to
meet Shatov, though it's true he still had his passport in his pocket.

