# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - II
[Metadata]: # {01.03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {01.03.02.01}
One morning, on the seventh or eighth day after Stepan Trofimovitch had
consented to become "engaged," about eleven o'clock, when I was hurrying as
usual to my afflicted friend, I had an adventure on the way.

I met Karmazinov, "the great writer," as Liputin called him. I had read
Karmazinov from a child. His novels and tales were well known to the past and
even to the present generation. I revelled in them; they were the great
enjoyment of my childhood and youth. Afterwards I grew rather less enthusiastic
over his work. I did not care so much for the novels with a purpose which he
had been writing of late as for his first, early works, which were so full of
spontaneous poetry, and his latest publications I had not liked at all.
Speaking generally, if I may venture to express my opinion on so delicate a
subject, all these talented gentlemen of the middling sort who are sometimes in
their lifetime accepted almost as geniuses, pass out of memory quite suddenly
and without a trace when they die, and what's more, it often happens that even
during their lifetime, as soon as a new generation grows up and takes the place
of the one in which they have flourished, they are forgotten and neglected by
every one in an incredibly short time. This somehow happens among us quite
suddenly, like the shifting of the scenes on the stage. Oh, it's not at all the
same as with Pushkin, Gogol, Molière, Voltaire, all those great men who really
had a new original word to say! It's true, too, that these talented gentlemen
of the middling sort in the decline of their venerable years usually write
themselves out in the most pitiful way, though they don't observe the fact
themselves. It happens not infrequently that a writer who has been for a long
time credited with extraordinary profundity and expected to exercise a great
and serious influence on the progress of society, betrays in the end such
poverty, such insipidity in his fundamental ideas that no one regrets that he
succeeded in writing himself out so soon. But the old grey-beards don't notice
this, and are angry. Their vanity sometimes, especially towards the end of
their career, reaches proportions that may well provoke wonder. God knows what
they begin to take themselves for--for gods at least! People used to say about
Karmazinov that his connections with aristocratic society and powerful
personages were dearer to him than his own soul, people used to say that on
meeting you he would be cordial, that he would fascinate and enchant you with
his open-heartedness, especially if you were of use to him in some way, and if
you came to him with some preliminary recommendation. But that before any stray
prince, any stray countess, anyone that he was afraid of, he would regard it as
his sacred duty to forget your existence with the most insulting carelessness,
like a chip of wood, like a fly, before you had even time to get out of his
sight; he seriously considered this the best and most aristocratic style. In
spite of the best of breeding and perfect knowledge of good manners he is, they
say, vain to such an hysterical pitch that he cannot conceal his irritability
as an author even in those circles of society where little interest is taken in
literature. If anyone were to surprise him by being indifferent, he would be
morbidly chagrined, and try to revenge himself.

A year before, I had read an article of his in a review, written with an
immense affectation of naïve poetry, and psychology too. He described the wreck
of some steamer on the English coast, of which he had been the witness, and how
he had seen the drowning people saved, and the dead bodies brought ashore. All
this rather long and verbose article was written solely with the object of
self-display. One seemed to read between the lines: "Concentrate yourselves on
me. Behold what I was like at those moments. What are the sea, the storm, the
rocks, the splinters of wrecked ships to you? I have described all that
sufficiently to you with my mighty pen. Why look at that drowned woman with the
dead child in her dead arms? Look rather at me, see how I was unable to bear
that sight and turned away from it. Here I stood with my back to it; here I was
horrified and could not bring myself to look; I blinked my eyes--isn't that
interesting?" When I told Stepan Trofimovitch my opinion of Karmazinov's
article he quite agreed with me.

When rumours had reached us of late that Karmazinov was coming to the
neighbourhood I was, of course, very eager to see him, and, if possible, to
make his acquaintance. I knew that this might be done through Stepan
Trofimovitch, they had once been friends. And now I suddenly met him at the
cross-roads. I knew him at once. He had been pointed out to me two or three
days before when he drove past with the governor's wife. He was a short,
stiff-looking old man, though not over fifty-five, with a rather red little
face, with thick grey locks of hair clustering under his chimney-pot hat, and
curling round his clean little pink ears. His clean little face was not
altogether handsome with its thin, long, crafty-looking lips, with its rather
fleshy nose, and its sharp, shrewd little eyes. He was dressed somewhat
shabbily in a sort of cape such as would be worn in Switzerland or North Italy
at that time of year. But, at any rate, all the minor details of his costume,
the little studs, and collar, the buttons, the tortoise-shell lorgnette on a
narrow black ribbon, the signet-ring, were all such as are worn by persons of
the most irreproachable good form. I am certain that in summer he must have
worn light prunella shoes with mother-of-pearl buttons at the side. When we met
he was standing still at the turning and looking about him, attentively.
Noticing that I was looking at him with interest, he asked me in a sugary,
though rather shrill voice:

"Allow me to ask, which is my nearest way to Bykovy Street?"

"To Bykovy Street? Oh, that's here, close by," I cried in great excitement.
"Straight on along this street and the second turning to the left."

"Very much obliged to you."

A curse on that minute! I fancy I was shy, and looked cringing. He instantly
noticed all that, and of course realised it all at once; that is, realised that
I knew who he was, that I had read him and revered him from a child, and that I
was shy and looked at him cringingly. He smiled, nodded again, and walked on as
I had directed him. I don't know why I turned back to follow him; I don't know
why I ran for ten paces beside him. He suddenly stood still again.

"And could you tell me where is the nearest cab-stand?" he shouted out to me
again.

It was a horrid shout! A horrid voice!

"A cab-stand? The nearest cab-stand is... by the Cathedral; there are always
cabs standing there," and I almost turned to run for a cab for him. I almost
believe that that was what he expected me to do. Of course I checked myself at
once, and stood still, but he had noticed my movement and was still watching me
with the same horrid smile. Then something happened which I shall never forget.

He suddenly dropped a tiny bag, which he was holding in his left hand; though
indeed it was not a bag, but rather a little box, or more probably some part of
a pocket-book, or to be more accurate a little reticule, rather like an
old-fashioned lady's reticule, though I really don't know what it was. I only
know that I flew to pick it up.

I am convinced that I did not really pick it up, but my first motion was
unmistakable. I could not conceal it, and, like a fool, I turned crimson. The
cunning fellow at once got all that could be got out of the circumstance.

"Don't trouble, I'll pick it up," he pronounced charmingly; that is, when he
was quite sure that I was not going to pick up the reticule, he picked it up as
though forestalling me, nodded once more, and went his way, leaving me to look
like a fool. It was as good as though I had picked it up myself. For five
minutes I considered myself utterly disgraced forever, but as I reached Stepan
Trofimovitch's house I suddenly burst out laughing; the meeting struck me as so
amusing that I immediately resolved to entertain Stepan Trofimovitch with an
account of it, and even to act the whole scene to him.

