# PART II - CHAPTER V. ON THE EVE OF THE FETE - I
[Metadata]: # {02.05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.05.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {02.05.01.01}
The date of the fête which Yulia Mihailovna was getting up for the benefit of
the governesses of our province had been several times fixed and put off. She
had invariably bustling round her Pyotr Stepanovitch and a little clerk,
Lyamshin, who used at one time to visit Stepan Trofimovitch, and had suddenly
found favour in the governor's house for the way he played the piano and now
was of use running errands. Liputin was there a good deal too, and Yulia
Mihailovna destined him to be the editor of a new independent provincial paper.
There were also several ladies, married and single, and lastly, even Karmazinov
who, though he could not be said to bustle, announced aloud with a complacent
air that he would agreeably astonish every one when the literary quadrille
began. An extraordinary multitude of donors and subscribers had turned up, all
the select society of the town; but even the unselect were admitted, if only
they produced the cash. Yulia Mihailovna observed that sometimes it was a
positive duty to allow the mixing of classes, "for otherwise who is to
enlighten them?"

A private drawing-room committee was formed, at which it was decided that the
fête was to be of a democratic character. The enormous list of subscriptions
tempted them to lavish expenditure. They wanted to do something on a marvellous
scale--that's why it was put off. They were still undecided where the ball was
to take place, whether in the immense house belonging to the marshal's wife,
which she was willing to give up to them for the day, or at Varvara Petrovna's
mansion at Skvoreshniki. It was rather a distance to Skvoreshniki, but many of
the committee were of opinion that it would be "freer" there. Varvara Petrovna
would dearly have liked it to have been in her house. It's difficult to
understand why this proud woman seemed almost making up to Yulia Mihailovna.
Probably what pleased her was that the latter in her turn seemed almost fawning
upon Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and was more gracious to him than to anyone. I
repeat again that Pyotr Stepanovitch was always, in continual whispers,
strengthening in the governor's household an idea he had insinuated there
already, that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was a man who had very mysterious
connections with very mysterious circles, and that he had certainly come here
with some commission from them.

People here seemed in a strange state of mind at the time. Among the ladies
especially a sort of frivolity was conspicuous, and it could not be said to be
a gradual growth. Certain very free-and-easy notions seemed to be in the air.
There was a sort of dissipated gaiety and levity, and I can't say it was always
quite pleasant. A lax way of thinking was the fashion. Afterwards when it was
all over, people blamed Yulia Mihailovna, her circle, her attitude. But it can
hardly have been altogether due to Yulia Mihailovna. On the contrary; at first
many people vied with one another in praising the new governor's wife for her
success in bringing local society together, and for making things more lively.
Several scandalous incidents took place, for which Yulia Mihailovna was in no
way responsible, but at the time people were amused and did nothing but laugh,
and there was no one to check them. A rather large group of people, it is true,
held themselves aloof, and had views of their own on the course of events. But
even these made no complaint at the time; they smiled, in fact.

I remember that a fairly large circle came into existence, as it were,
spontaneously, the centre of which perhaps was really to be found in Yulia
Mihailovna's drawing-room. In this intimate circle which surrounded her, among
the younger members of it, of course, it was considered admissible to play all
sorts of pranks, sometimes rather free-and-easy ones, and, in fact, such
conduct became a principle among them. In this circle there were even some very
charming ladies. The young people arranged picnics, and even parties, and
sometimes went about the town in a regular cavalcade, in carriages and on
horseback. They sought out adventures, even got them up themselves, simply for
the sake of having an amusing story to tell. They treated our town as though it
were a sort of Glupov. People called them the jeerers or sneerers, because they
did not stick at anything. It happened, for instance, that the wife of a local
lieutenant, a little brunette, very young though she looked worn out from her
husband's ill-treatment, at an evening party thoughtlessly sat down to play
whist for high stakes in the fervent hope of winning enough to buy herself a
mantle, and instead of winning, lost fifteen roubles. Being afraid of her
husband, and having no means of paying, she plucked up the courage of former
days and ventured on the sly to ask for a loan, on the spot, at the party, from
the son of our mayor, a very nasty youth, precociously vicious. The latter not
only refused it, but went laughing aloud to tell her husband. The lieutenant,
who certainly was poor, with nothing but his salary, took his wife home and
avenged himself upon her to his heart's content in spite of her shrieks, wails,
and entreaties on her knees for forgiveness. This revolting story excited
nothing but mirth all over the town, and though the poor wife did not belong to
Yulia Mihailovna's circle, one of the ladies of the "cavalcade," an eccentric
and adventurous character who happened to know her, drove round, and simply
carried her off to her own house. Here she was at once taken up by our madcaps,
made much of, loaded with presents, and kept for four days without being sent
back to her husband. She stayed at the adventurous lady's all day long, drove
about with her and all the sportive company in expeditions about the town, and
took part in dances and merry-making. They kept egging her on to haul her
husband before the court and to make a scandal. They declared that they would
all support her and would come and bear witness. The husband kept quiet, not
daring to oppose them. The poor thing realised at last that she had got into a
hopeless position and, more dead than alive with fright, on the fourth day she
ran off in the dusk from her protectors to her lieutenant. It's not definitely
known what took place between husband and wife, but two shutters of the
low-pitched little house in which the lieutenant lodged were not opened for a
fortnight. Yulia Mihailovna was angry with the mischief-makers when she heard
about it all, and was greatly displeased with the conduct of the adventurous
lady, though the latter had presented the lieutenant's wife to her on the day
she carried her off. However, this was soon forgotten.

Another time a petty clerk, a respectable head of a family, married his
daughter, a beautiful girl of seventeen, known to every one in the town, to
another petty clerk, a young man who came from a different district. But
suddenly it was learned that the young husband had treated the beauty very
roughly on the wedding night, chastising her for what he regarded as a stain on
his honour. Lyamshin, who was almost a witness of the affair, because he got
drunk at the wedding and so stayed the night, as soon as day dawned, ran round
with the diverting intelligence.

Instantly a party of a dozen was made up, all of them on horseback, some on
hired Cossack horses, Pyotr Stepanovitch, for instance, and Liputin, who, in
spite of his grey hairs, took part in almost every scandalous adventure of our
reckless youngsters. When the young couple appeared in the street in a droshky
with a pair of horses to make the calls which are obligatory in our town on the
day after a wedding, in spite of anything that may happen, the whole cavalcade,
with merry laughter, surrounded the droshky and followed them about the town
all the morning. They did not, it's true, go into the house, but waited for
them outside, on horseback. They refrained from marked insult to the bride or
bridegroom, but still they caused a scandal. The whole town began talking of
it. Every one laughed, of course. But at this Von Lembke was angry, and again
had a lively scene with Yulia Mihailovna. She, too, was extremely angry, and
formed the intention of turning the scapegraces out of her house. But next day
she forgave them all after persuasions from Pyotr Stepanovitch and some words
from Karmazinov, who considered the affair rather amusing.

"It's in harmony with the traditions of the place," he said. "Anyway it's
characteristic and... bold; and look, every one's laughing, you're the only
person indignant."

But there were pranks of a certain character that were absolutely past
endurance.

A respectable woman of the artisan class, who went about selling gospels, came
into the town. People talked about her, because some interesting references to
these gospel women had just appeared in the Petersburg papers. Again the same
buffoon, Lyamshin, with the help of a divinity student, who was taking a
holiday while waiting for a post in the school, succeeded, on the pretence of
buying books from the gospel woman, in thrusting into her bag a whole bundle of
indecent and obscene photographs from abroad, sacrificed expressly for the
purpose, as we learned afterwards, by a highly respectable old gentleman (I
will omit his name) with an order on his breast, who, to use his own words,
loved "a healthy laugh and a merry jest." When the poor woman went to take out
the holy books in the bazaar, the photographs were scattered about the place.
There were roars of laughter and murmurs of indignation. A crowd collected,
began abusing her, and would have come to blows if the police had not arrived
in the nick of time. The gospel woman was taken to the lock-up, and only in the
evening, thanks to the efforts of Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had learned with
indignation the secret details of this loathsome affair, she was released and
escorted out of the town. At this point Yulia Mihailovna would certainly have
forbidden Lyamshin her house, but that very evening the whole circle brought
him to her with the intelligence that he had just composed a new piece for the
piano, and persuaded her at least to hear it. The piece turned out to be really
amusing, and bore the comic title of "The Franco-Prussian War." It began with
the menacing strains of the "Marseillaise":

_"Qu'un sang impur abreuve nos sillons."_

There is heard the pompous challenge, the intoxication of future victories. But
suddenly mingling with the masterly variations on the national hymn, somewhere
from some corner quite close, on one side come the vulgar strains of "Mein
lieber Augustin." The "Marseillaise" goes on unconscious of them. The
"Marseillaise" is at the climax of its intoxication with its own grandeur; but
Augustin gains strength; Augustin grows more and more insolent, and suddenly
the melody of Augustin begins to blend with the melody of the "Marseillaise."
The latter begins, as it were, to get angry; becoming aware of Augustin at last
she tries to fling him off, to brush him aside like a tiresome insignificant
fly. But "Mein lieber Augustin" holds his ground firmly, he is cheerful and
self-confident, he is gleeful and impudent, and the "Marseillaise" seems
suddenly to become terribly stupid. She can no longer conceal her anger and
mortification; it is a wail of indignation, tears, and curses, with hands
outstretched to Providence.

_"Pas un pouce de notre terrain; pas une de nos forteresses."_

But she is forced to sing in time with "Mein lieber Augustin." Her melody
passes in a sort of foolish way into Augustin; she yields and dies away. And
only by snatches there is heard again:

_"Qu'un sang impur..."_


But at once it passes very offensively into the vulgar waltz. She submits
altogether. It is Jules Favre sobbing on Bismarck's bosom and surrendering
every thing.... But at this point Augustin too grows fierce; hoarse sounds are
heard; there is a suggestion of countless gallons of beer, of a frenzy of
self-glorification, demands for millions, for fine cigars, champagne, and
hostages. Augustin passes into a wild yell.... "The Franco-Prussian War" is
over. Our circle applauded, Yulia Mihailovna smiled, and said, "Now, how is one
to turn him out?" Peace was made. The rascal really had talent. Stepan
Trofimovitch assured me on one occasion that the very highest artistic talents
may exist in the most abominable blackguards, and that the one thing does not
interfere with the other. There was a rumour afterwards that Lyamshin had
stolen this burlesque from a talented and modest young man of his acquaintance,
whose name remained unknown. But this is beside the mark. This worthless fellow
who had hung about Stepan Trofimovitch for years, who used at his evening
parties, when invited, to mimic Jews of various types, a deaf peasant woman
making her confession, or the birth of a child, now at Yulia Mihailovna's
caricatured Stepan Trofimovitch himself in a killing way, under the title of "A
Liberal of the Forties." Everybody shook with laughter, so that in the end it
was quite impossible to turn him out: he had become too necessary a person.
Besides he fawned upon Pyotr Stepanovitch in a slavish way, and he, in his
turn, had obtained by this time a strange and unaccountable influence over
Yulia Mihailovna.

I wouldn't have talked about this scoundrel, and, indeed, he would not be worth
dwelling upon, but there was another revolting story, so people declare, in
which he had a hand, and this story I cannot omit from my record.

One morning the news of a hideous and revolting sacrilege was all over the
town. At the entrance to our immense marketplace there stands the ancient
church of Our Lady's Nativity, which was a remarkable antiquity in our ancient
town. At the gates of the precincts there is a large ikon of the Mother of God
fixed behind a grating in the wall. And behold, one night the ikon had been
robbed, the glass of the case was broken, the grating was smashed and several
stones and pearls (I don't know whether they were very precious ones) had been
removed from the crown and the setting. But what was worse, besides the theft a
senseless, scoffing sacrilege had been perpetrated. Behind the broken glass of
the ikon they found in the morning, so it was said, a live mouse. Now, four
months since, it has been established beyond doubt that the crime was committed
by the convict Fedka, but for some reason it is added that Lyamshin took part
in it. At the time no one spoke of Lyamshin or had any suspicion of him. But
now every one says it was he who put the mouse there. I remember all our
responsible officials were rather staggered. A crowd thronged round the scene
of the crime from early morning. There was a crowd continually before it, not a
very huge one, but always about a hundred people, some coming and some going.
As they approached they crossed themselves and bowed down to the ikon. They
began to give offerings, and a church dish made its appearance, and with the
dish a monk. But it was only about three o'clock in the afternoon it occurred
to the authorities that it was possible to prohibit the crowds standing about,
and to command them when they had prayed, bowed down and left their offerings,
to pass on. Upon Von Lembke this unfortunate incident made the gloomiest
impression. As I was told, Yulia Mihailovna said afterwards it was from this
ill-omened morning that she first noticed in her husband that strange
depression which persisted in him until he left our province on account of
illness two months ago, and, I believe, haunts him still in Switzerland, where
he has gone for a rest after his brief career amongst us.

I remember at one o'clock in the afternoon I crossed the marketplace; the crowd
was silent and their faces solemn and gloomy. A merchant, fat and sallow, drove
up, got out of his carriage, made a bow to the ground, kissed the ikon, offered
a rouble, sighing, got back into his carriage and drove off. Another carriage
drove up with two ladies accompanied by two of our scapegraces. The young
people (one of whom was not quite young) got out of their carriage too, and
squeezed their way up to the ikon, pushing people aside rather carelessly.
Neither of the young men took off his hat, and one of them put a pince-nez on
his nose. In the crowd there was a murmur, vague but unfriendly. The dandy with
the pince-nez took out of his purse, which was stuffed full of bank-notes, a
copper farthing and flung it into the dish. Both laughed, and, talking loudly,
went back to their carriage. At that moment Lizaveta Nikolaevna galloped up,
escorted by Mavriky Nikolaevitch. She jumped off her horse, flung the reins to
her companion, who, at her bidding, remained on his horse, and approached the
ikon at the very moment when the farthing had been flung down. A flush of
indignation suffused her cheeks; she took off her round hat and her gloves,
fell straight on her knees before the ikon on the muddy pavement, and
reverently bowed down three times to the earth. Then she took out her purse,
but as it appeared she had only a few small coins in it she instantly took off
her diamond ear-rings and put them in the dish.

"May I? May I? For the adornment of the setting?" she asked the monk.

"It is permitted," replied the latter, "every gift is good." The crowd was
silent, expressing neither dissent nor approval.

Liza got on her horse again, in her muddy riding-habit, and galloped away.

