# PART II - CHAPTER X. FILIBUSTERS. A FATAL MORNING - III
[Metadata]: # {02.10.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.10.03}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# III
[TreeTag]: # {02.10.03.01}
In the first place, the whole company who had filled three carriages crowded
into the waiting-room. There was a special entrance to Yulia Mihailovna's
apartments on the left as one entered the house; but on this occasion they all
went through the waiting-room--and I imagine just because Stepan Trofimovitch
was there, and because all that had happened to him as well as the Shpigulin
affair had reached Yulia Mihailovna's ears as she drove into the town.
Lyamshin, who for some misdemeanour had not been invited to join the party and
so knew all that had been happening in the town before anyone else, brought her
the news. With spiteful glee he hired a wretched Cossack nag and hastened on
the way to Skvoreshniki to meet the returning cavalcade with the diverting
intelligence. I fancy that, in spite of her lofty determination, Yulia
Mihailovna was a little disconcerted on hearing such surprising news, but
probably only for an instant. The political aspect of the affair, for instance,
could not cause her uneasiness; Pyotr Stepanovitch had impressed upon her three
or four times that the Shpigulin ruffians ought to be flogged, and Pyotr
Stepanovitch certainly had for some time past been a great authority in her
eyes. "But... anyway, I shall make him pay for it," she doubtless reflected,
the "he," of course, referring to her spouse. I must observe in passing that on
this occasion, as though purposely, Pyotr Stepanovitch had taken no part in the
expedition, and no one had seen him all day. I must mention too, by the way,
that Varvara Petrovna had come back to the town with her guests (in the same
carriage with Yulia Mihailovna) in order to be present at the last meeting of
the committee which was arranging the fÃªte for the next day. She too must have
been interested, and perhaps even agitated, by the news about Stepan
Trofimovitch communicated by Lyamshin.

The hour of reckoning for Andrey Antonovitch followed at once. Alas! he felt
that from the first glance at his admirable wife. With an open air and an
enchanting smile she went quickly up to Stepan Trofimovitch, held out her
exquisitely gloved hand, and greeted him with a perfect shower of flattering
phrases--as though the only thing she cared about that morning was to make
haste to be charming to Stepan Trofimovitch because at last she saw him in her
house. There was not one hint of the search that morning; it was as though she
knew nothing of it. There was not one word to her husband, not one glance in
his direction--as though he had not been in the room. What's more, she promptly
confiscated Stepan Trofimovitch and carried him off to the drawing-room--as
though he had had no interview with Lembke, or as though it was not worth
prolonging if he had. I repeat again, I think that in this, Yulia Mihailovna,
in spite of her aristocratic tone, made another great mistake. And Karmazinov
particularly did much to aggravate this. (He had taken part in the expedition
at Yulia Mihailovna's special request, and in that way had, incidentally, paid
his visit to Varvara Petrovna, and she was so poor-spirited as to be perfectly
delighted at it.) On seeing Stepan Trofimovitch, he called out from the doorway
(he came in behind the rest) and pressed forward to embrace him, even
interrupting Yulia Mihailovna.

"What years, what ages! At last..._excellent ami._"

He made as though to kiss him, offering his cheek, of course, and Stepan
Trofimovitch was so fluttered that he could not avoid saluting it.

_"Cher,"_ he said to me that evening, recalling all the events of that day, "I
wondered at that moment which of us was the most contemptible: he, embracing me
only to humiliate me, or I, despising him and his face and kissing it on the
spot, though I might have turned away.... Foo!"

"Come, tell me about yourself, tell me everything," Karmazinov drawled and
lisped, as though it were possible for him on the spur of the moment to give an
account of twenty-five years of his life. But this foolish trifling was the
height of "chic."

"Remember that the last time we met was at the Granovsky dinner in Moscow, and
that twenty-four years have passed since then..." Stepan Trofimovitch began
very reasonably (and consequently not at all in the same "chic" style).

_"Ce cher homme,"_ Karmazinov interrupted with shrill familiarity, squeezing
his shoulder with exaggerated friendliness. "Make haste and take us to your
room, Yulia Mihailovna; there he'll sit down and tell us everything."

"And yet I was never at all intimate with that peevish old woman," Stepan
Trofimovitch went on complaining to me that same evening, shaking with anger;
"we were almost boys, and I'd begun to detest him even then... just as he had
me, of course."

Yulia Mihailovna's drawing-room filled up quickly. Varvara Petrovna was
particularly excited, though she tried to appear indifferent, but I caught her
once or twice glancing with hatred at Karmazinov and with wrath at Stepan
Trofimovitch--the wrath of anticipation, the wrath of jealousy and love: if
Stepan Trofimovitch had blundered this time and had let Karmazinov make him
look small before every one, I believe she would have leapt up and beaten him.
I have forgotten to say that Liza too was there, and I had never seen her more
radiant, carelessly light-hearted, and happy. Mavriky Nikolaevitch was there
too, of course. In the crowd of young ladies and rather vulgar young men who
made up Yulia Mihailovna's usual retinue, and among whom this vulgarity was
taken for sprightliness, and cheap cynicism for wit, I noticed two or three new
faces: a very obsequious Pole who was on a visit in the town; a German doctor,
a sturdy old fellow who kept loudly laughing with great zest at his own wit;
and lastly, a very young princeling from Petersburg like an automaton figure,
with the deportment of a state dignitary and a fearfully high collar. But it
was evident that Yulia Mihailovna had a very high opinion of this visitor, and
was even a little anxious of the impression her salon was making on him.

_"Cher M. Karmazinov,"_ said Stepan Trofimovitch, sitting in a picturesque pose
on the sofa and suddenly beginning to lisp as daintily as Karmazinov himself,
"_cher M. Karmazinov,_ the life of a man of our time and of certain
convictions, even after an interval of twenty-five years, is bound to seem
monotonous..."

The German went off into a loud abrupt guffaw like a neigh, evidently imagining
that Stepan Trofimovitch had said something exceedingly funny. The latter gazed
at him with studied amazement but produced no effect on him whatever. The
prince, too, looked at the German, turning head, collar and all, towards him
and putting up his pince-nez, though without the slightest curiosity.

"... Is bound to seem monotonous," Stepan Trofimovitch intentionally repeated,
drawling each word as deliberately and nonchalantly as possible. "And so my
life has been throughout this quarter of a century, _et comme on trouve partout
plus de moines que de raison,_ and as I am entirely of this opinion, it has
come to pass that throughout this quarter of a century I..."

_"C'est charmant, les moines,"_ whispered Yulia Mihailovna, turning to Varvara
Petrovna, who was sitting beside her.

Varvara Petrovna responded with a look of pride. But Karmazinov could not
stomach the success of the French phrase, and quickly and shrilly interrupted
Stepan Trofimovitch.

"As for me, I am quite at rest on that score, and for the past seven years I've
been settled at Karlsruhe. And last year, when it was proposed by the town
council to lay down a new water-pipe, I felt in my heart that this question of
water-pipes in Karlsruhe was dearer and closer to my heart than all the
questions of my precious Fatherland... in this period of so-called reform."

"I can't help sympathising, though it goes against the grain," sighed Stepan
Trofimovitch, bowing his head significantly.

Yulia Mihailovna was triumphant: the conversation was becoming profound and
taking a political turn.

"A drain-pipe?" the doctor inquired in a loud voice.

"A water-pipe, doctor, a water-pipe, and I positively assisted them in drawing
up the plan."

The doctor went off into a deafening guffaw. Many people followed his example,
laughing in the face of the doctor, who remained unconscious of it and was
highly delighted that every one was laughing.

"You must allow me to differ from you, Karmazinov," Yulia Mihailovna hastened
to interpose. "Karlsruhe is all very well, but you are fond of mystifying
people, and this time we don't believe you. What Russian writer has presented
so many modern types, has brought forward so many contemporary problems, has
put his finger on the most vital modern points which make up the type of the
modern man of action? You, only you, and no one else. It's no use your assuring
us of your coldness towards your own country and your ardent interest in the
water-pipes of Karlsruhe. Ha ha!"

"Yes, no doubt," lisped Karmazinov. "I have portrayed in the character of
Pogozhev all the failings of the Slavophils and in the character of Nikodimov
all the failings of the Westerners...."

"I say, hardly _all!_" Lyamshin whispered slyly.

"But I do this by the way, simply to while away the tedious hours and to
satisfy the persistent demands of my fellow-countrymen."

"You are probably aware, Stepan Trofimovitch," Yulia Mihailovna went on
enthusiastically, "that to-morrow we shall have the delight of hearing the
charming lines... one of the last of Semyon Yakovlevitch's exquisite literary
inspirations--it's called _Merci._ He announces in this piece that he will
write no more, that nothing in the world will induce him to, if angels from
Heaven or, what's more, all the best society were to implore him to change his
mind. In fact he is laying down the pen for good, and this graceful _Merci_ is
addressed to the public in grateful acknowledgment of the constant enthusiasm
with which it has for so many years greeted his unswerving loyalty to true
Russian thought."

Yulia Mihailovna was at the acme of bliss.

"Yes, I shall make my farewell; I shall say my _Merci_ and depart and there...
in Karlsruhe... I shall close my eyes." Karmazinov was gradually becoming
maudlin.

Like many of our great writers (and there are numbers of them amongst us), he
could not resist praise, and began to be limp at once, in spite of his
penetrating wit. But I consider this is pardonable. They say that one of our
Shakespeares positively blurted out in private conversation that "we _great
men_ can't do otherwise," and so on, and, what's more, was unaware of it.

"There in Karlsruhe I shall close my eyes. When we have done our duty, all
that's left for us great men is to make haste to close our eyes without seeking
a reward. I shall do so too."

"Give me the address and I shall come to Karlsruhe to visit your tomb," said
the German, laughing immoderately.

"They send corpses by rail nowadays," one of the less important young men said
unexpectedly.

Lyamshin positively shrieked with delight. Yulia Mihailovna frowned. Nikolay
Stavrogin walked in.

"Why, I was told that you were locked up?" he said aloud, addressing Stepan
Trofimovitch before every one else.

"No, it was a case of unlocking," jested Stepan Trofimovitch.

"But I hope that what's happened will have no influence on what I asked you to
do," Yulia Mihailovna put in again. "I trust that you will not let this
unfortunate annoyance, of which I had no idea, lead you to disappoint our eager
expectations and deprive us of the enjoyment of hearing your reading at our
literary matinÃ©e."

"I don't know, I... now..."

"Really, I am so unlucky, Varvara Petrovna... and only fancy, just when I was
so longing to make the personal acquaintance of one of the most remarkable and
independent intellects of Russia--and here Stepan Trofimovitch suddenly talks
of deserting us."

"Your compliment is uttered so audibly that I ought to pretend not to hear it,"
Stepan Trofimovitch said neatly, "but I cannot believe that my insignificant
presence is so indispensable at your fÃªte to-morrow. However, I..."

"Why, you'll spoil him!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, bursting into the room.
"I've only just got him in hand--and in one morning he has been searched,
arrested, taken by the collar by a policeman, and here ladies are cooing to him
in the governor's drawing-room. Every bone in his body is aching with rapture;
in his wildest dreams he had never hoped for such good fortune. Now he'll begin
informing against the Socialists after this!"

"Impossible, Pyotr Stepanovitch! Socialism is too grand an idea to be
unrecognised by Stepan Trofimovitch." Yulia Mihailovna took up the gauntlet
with energy.

"It's a great idea but its exponents are not always great men, _et brisons-lÃ ,
mon cher,_" Stepan Trofimovitch ended, addressing his son and rising gracefully
from his seat.

But at this point an utterly unexpected circumstance occurred. Von Lembke had
been in the room for some time but seemed unnoticed by anyone, though every one
had seen him come in. In accordance with her former plan, Yulia Mihailovna went
on ignoring him. He took up his position near the door and with a stern face
listened gloomily to the conversation. Hearing an allusion to the events of the
morning, he began fidgeting uneasily, stared at the prince, obviously struck by
his stiffly starched, prominent collar; then suddenly he seemed to start on
hearing the voice of Pyotr Stepanovitch and seeing him burst in; and no sooner
had Stepan Trofimovitch uttered his phrase about Socialists than Lembke went up
to him, pushing against Lyamshin, who at once skipped out of the way with an
affected gesture of surprise, rubbing his shoulder and pretending that he had
been terribly bruised.

"Enough!" said Von Lembke to Stepan Trofimovitch, vigorously gripping the hand
of the dismayed gentleman and squeezing it with all his might in both of his.
"Enough! The filibusters of our day are unmasked. Not another word. Measures
have been taken...."

He spoke loudly enough to be heard by all the room, and concluded with energy.
The impression he produced was poignant. Everybody felt that something was
wrong. I saw Yulia Mihailovna turn pale. The effect was heightened by a trivial
accident. After announcing that measures had been taken, Lembke turned sharply
and walked quickly towards the door, but he had hardly taken two steps when he
stumbled over a rug, swerved forward, and almost fell. For a moment he stood
still, looked at the rug at which he had stumbled, and, uttering aloud "Change
it!" went out of the room. Yulia Mihailovna ran after him. Her exit was
followed by an uproar, in which it was difficult to distinguish anything. Some
said he was "deranged," others that he was "liable to attacks"; others put
their fingers to their forehead; Lyamshin, in the corner, put his two fingers
above his forehead. People hinted at some domestic difficulties--in a whisper,
of course. No one took up his hat; all were waiting. I don't know what Yulia
Mihailovna managed to do, but five minutes later she came back, doing her
utmost to appear composed. She replied evasively that Andrey Antonovitch was
rather excited, but that it meant nothing, that he had been like that from a
child, that she knew "much better," and that the fÃªte next day would certainly
cheer him up. Then followed a few flattering words to Stepan Trofimovitch
simply from civility, and a loud invitation to the members of the committee to
open the meeting now, at once. Only then, all who were not members of the
committee prepared to go home; but the painful incidents of this fatal day were
not yet over.

I noticed at the moment when Nikolay Stavrogin came in that Liza looked quickly
and intently at him and was for a long time unable to take her eyes off him--so
much so that at last it attracted attention. I saw Mavriky Nikolaevitch bend
over her from behind; he seemed to mean to whisper something to her, but
evidently changed his intention and drew himself up quickly, looking round at
every one with a guilty air. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch too excited curiosity; his
face was paler than usual and there was a strangely absent-minded look in his
eyes. After flinging his question at Stepan Trofimovitch he seemed to forget
about him altogether, and I really believe he even forgot to speak to his
hostess. He did not once look at Liza--not because he did not want to, but I am
certain because he did not notice her either. And suddenly, after the brief
silence that followed Yulia Mihailovna's invitation to open the meeting without
loss of time, Liza's musical voice, intentionally loud, was heard. She called
to Stavrogin.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, a captain who calls himself a relation of yours, the
brother of your wife, and whose name is Lebyadkin, keeps writing impertinent
letters to me, complaining of you and offering to tell me some secrets about
you. If he really is a connection of yours, please tell him not to annoy me,
and save me from this unpleasantness."

There was a note of desperate challenge in these words--every one realised it.
The accusation was unmistakable, though perhaps it was a surprise to herself.
She was like a man who shuts his eyes and throws himself from the roof.

But Nikolay Stavrogin's answer was even more astounding.

To begin with, it was strange that he was not in the least surprised and
listened to Liza with unruffled attention. There was no trace of either
confusion or anger in his face. Simply, firmly, even with an air of perfect
readiness, he answered the fatal question:

"Yes, I have the misfortune to be connected with that man. I have been the
husband of his sister for nearly five years. You may be sure I will give him
your message as soon as possible, and I'll answer for it that he shan't annoy
you again."

I shall never forget the horror that was reflected on the face of Varvara
Petrovna. With a distracted air she got up from her seat, lifting up her right
hand as though to ward off a blow. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked at her,
looked at Liza, at the spectators, and suddenly smiled with infinite disdain;
he walked deliberately out of the room. Every one saw how Liza leapt up from
the sofa as soon as he turned to go and unmistakably made a movement to run
after him. But she controlled herself and did not run after him; she went
quietly out of the room without saying a word or even looking at anyone,
accompanied, of course, by Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who rushed after her.

The uproar and the gossip that night in the town I will not attempt to
describe. Varvara Petrovna shut herself up in her town house and Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, it was said, went straight to Skvoreshniki without seeing his
mother. Stepan Trofimovitch sent me that evening to _cette chÃ¨re amie_ to
implore her to allow him to come to her, but she would not see me. He was
terribly overwhelmed; he shed tears. "Such a marriage! Such a marriage! Such an
awful thing in the family!" he kept repeating. He remembered Karmazinov,
however, and abused him terribly. He set to work vigorously to prepare for the
reading too and--the artistic temperament!--rehearsed before the looking-glass
and went over all the jokes and witticisms uttered in the course of his life
which he had written down in a separate notebook, to insert into his reading
next day.

"My dear, I do this for the sake of a great idea," he said to me, obviously
justifying himself. "_Cher ami,_ I have been stationary for twenty-five years
and suddenly I've begun to move--whither, I know not--but I've begun to
move...."

