# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - VI
[Metadata]: # {01.03.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.06}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# VI
[TreeTag]: # {01.03.06.01}
"The day before yesterday a servant was suddenly sent to me: 'You are asked to
call at twelve o'clock,' said he. Can you fancy such a thing? I threw aside my
work, and precisely at midday yesterday I was ringing at the bell. I was let
into the drawing room; I waited a minute--she came in; she made me sit down and
sat down herself, opposite. I sat down, and I couldn't believe it; you know how
she has always treated me. She began at once without beating about the bush,
you know her way. 'You remember,' she said, 'that four years ago when Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch was ill he did some strange things which made all the town
wonder till the position was explained. One of those actions concerned you
personally. When Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch recovered he went at my request to
call on you. I know that he talked to you several times before, too. Tell me
openly and candidly what you... (she faltered a little at this point) what you
thought of Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch then... what was your view of him
altogether... what idea you were able to form of him at that time... and still
have?'

"Here she was completely confused, so that she paused for a whole minute, and
suddenly flushed. I was alarmed. She began again--touchingly is not quite the
word, it's not applicable to her--but in a very impressive tone:

"'I want you,' she said, 'to understand me clearly and without mistake. I've
sent for you now because I look upon you as a keen-sighted and quick-witted
man, qualified to make accurate observations.' (What compliments!) 'You'll
understand too,' she said, 'that I am a mother appealing to you.... Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch has suffered some calamities and has passed through many
changes of fortune in his life. All that,' she said, 'might well have affected
the state of his mind. I'm not speaking of madness, of course,' she said,
'that's quite out of the question!' (This was uttered proudly and resolutely.)
'But there might be something strange, something peculiar, some turn of
thought, a tendency to some particular way of looking at things.' (Those were
her exact words, and I admired, Stepan Trofimovitch, the exactness with which
Varvara Petrovna can put things. She's a lady of superior intellect!) 'I have
noticed in him, anyway,' she said, 'a perpetual restlessness and a tendency to
peculiar impulses. But I am a mother and you are an impartial spectator, and
therefore qualified with your intelligence to form a more impartial opinion. I
implore you, in fact' (yes, that word, 'implore' was uttered!), 'to tell me the
whole truth, without mincing matters. And if you will give me your word never
to forget that I have spoken to you in confidence, you may reckon upon my
always being ready to seize every opportunity in the future to show my
gratitude.' Well, what do you say to that?"

"You have... so amazed me..." faltered Stepan Trofimovitch, "that I don't
believe you."

"Yes, observe, observe," cried Liputin, as though he had not heard Stepan
Trofimovitch, "observe what must be her agitation and uneasiness if she stoops
from her grandeur to appeal to a man like me, and even condescends to beg me to
keep it secret. What do you call that? Hasn't she received some news of Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, something unexpected?"

"I don't know... of news of any sort... I haven't seen her for some days,
but... but I must say..." lisped Stepan Trofimovitch, evidently hardly able to
think clearly, "but I must say, Liputin, that if it was said to you in
confidence, and here you're telling it before every one..."

"Absolutely in confidence! But God strike me dead if I... But as for telling it
here... what does it matter? Are we strangers, even Alexey Nilitch?"

"I don't share that attitude. No doubt we three here will keep the secret, but
I'm afraid of the fourth, you, and wouldn't trust you in anything...."

"What do you mean by that? Why it's more to my interest than anyone's, seeing I
was promised eternal gratitude! What I wanted was to point out in this
connection one extremely strange incident, rather to say, psychological than
simply strange. Yesterday evening, under the influence of my conversation with
Varvara Petrovna--you can fancy yourself what an impression it made on me--I
approached Alexey Nilitch with a discreet question: 'You knew Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch abroad,' said I, 'and used to know him before in Petersburg
too. What do you think of his mind and his abilities?' said I. He answered
laconically, as his way is, that he was a man of subtle intellect and sound
judgment. 'And have you never noticed in the course of years,' said I, 'any
turn of ideas or peculiar way of looking at things, or any, so to say,
insanity?' In fact, I repeated Varvara Petrovna's own question. And would you
believe it, Alexey Nilitch suddenly grew thoughtful, and scowled, just as he's
doing now. 'Yes,' said he, 'I have sometimes thought there was something
strange.' Take note, too, that if anything could have seemed strange even to
Alexey Nilitch, it must really have been something, mustn't it?"

"Is that true?" said Stepan Trofimovitch, turning to Alexey Nilitch.

"I should prefer not to speak of it," answered Alexey Nilitch, suddenly raising
his head, and looking at him with flashing eyes. "I wish to contest your right
to do this, Liputin. You've no right to drag me into this. I did not give my
whole opinion at all. Though I knew Nikolay Stavrogin in Petersburg that was
long ago, and though I've met him since I know him very little. I beg you to
leave me out and... All this is something like scandal."

Liputin threw up his hands with an air of oppressed innocence.

"A scandal-monger! Why not say a spy while you're about it? It's all very well
for you, Alexey Nilitch, to criticise when you stand aloof from everything. But
you wouldn't believe it, Stepan Trofimovitch--take Captain Lebyadkin, he is
stupid enough, one may say... in fact, one's ashamed to say how stupid he is;
there is a Russian comparison, to signify the degree of it; and do you know he
considers himself injured by Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, though he is full of
admiration for his wit. 'I'm amazed,' said he, 'at that man. He's a subtle
serpent.' His own words. And I said to him (still under the influence of my
conversation, and after I had spoken to Alexey Nilitch), 'What do you think,
captain, is your subtle serpent mad or not?' Would you believe it, it was just
as if I'd given him a sudden lash from behind. He simply leapt up from his
seat. 'Yes,' said he, '... yes, only that,' he said, 'cannot affect...' 'Affect
what?' He didn't finish. Yes, and then he fell to thinking so bitterly,
thinking so much, that his drunkenness dropped off him. We were sitting in
Filipov's restaurant. And it wasn't till half an hour later that he suddenly
struck the table with his fist. 'Yes,' said he, 'maybe he's mad, but that can't
affect it....' Again he didn't say what it couldn't affect. Of course I'm only
giving you an extract of the conversation, but one can understand the sense of
it. You may ask whom you like, they all have the same idea in their heads,
though it never entered anyone's head before. 'Yes,' they say, 'he's mad; he's
very clever, but perhaps he's mad too.'"

Stepan Trofimovitch sat pondering, and thought intently.

"And how does Lebyadkin know?"

"Do you mind inquiring about that of Alexey Nilitch, who has just called me a
spy? I'm a spy, yet I don't know, but Alexey Nilitch knows all the ins and outs
of it, and holds his tongue."

"I know nothing about it, or hardly anything," answered the engineer with the
same irritation. "You make Lebyadkin drunk to find out. You brought me here to
find out and to make me say. And so you must be a spy."

"I haven't made him drunk yet, and he's not worth the money either, with all
his secrets. They are not worth that to me. I don't know what they are to you.
On the contrary, he is scattering the money, though twelve days ago he begged
fifteen kopecks of me, and it's he treats me to champagne, not I him. But
you've given me an idea, and if there should be occasion I will make him drunk,
just to get to the bottom of it and maybe I shall find out... all your little
secrets," Liputin snapped back spitefully.

Stepan Trofimovitch looked in bewilderment at the two disputants. Both were
giving themselves away, and what's more, were not standing on ceremony. The
thought crossed my mind that Liputin had brought this Alexey Nilitch to us with
the simple object of drawing him into a conversation through a third person for
purposes of his own--his favourite manoeuvre.

"Alexey Nilitch knows Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch quite well," he went on,
irritably, "only he conceals it. And as to your question about Captain
Lebyadkin, he made his acquaintance before any of us did, six years ago in
Petersburg, in that obscure, if one may so express it, epoch in the life of
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, before he had dreamed of rejoicing our hearts by
coming here. Our prince, one must conclude, surrounded himself with rather a
queer selection of acquaintances. It was at that time, it seems, that he made
acquaintance with this gentleman here."

"Take care, Liputin. I warn you, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch meant to be here soon
himself, and he knows how to defend himself."

"Why warn me? I am the first to cry out that he is a man of the most subtle and
refined intelligence, and I quite reassured Varvara Petrovna yesterday on that
score. 'It's his character,' I said to her, 'that I can't answer for.'
Lebyadkin said the same thing yesterday: 'A lot of harm has come to me from his
character,' he said. Stepan Trofimovitch, it's all very well for you to cry out
about slander and spying, and at the very time observe that you wring it all
out of me, and with such immense curiosity too. Now, Varvara Petrovna went
straight to the point yesterday. 'You have had a personal interest in the
business,' she said, 'that's why I appeal to you.' I should say so! What need
to look for motives when I've swallowed a personal insult from his excellency
before the whole society of the place. I should think I have grounds to be
interested, not merely for the sake of gossip. He shakes hands with you one
day, and next day, for no earthly reason, he returns your hospitality by
slapping you on the cheeks in the face of all decent society, if the fancy
takes him, out of sheer wantonness. And what's more, the fair sex is everything
for them, these butterflies and mettlesome cocks! Grand gentlemen with little
wings like the ancient cupids, lady-killing Petchorins! It's all very well for
you, Stepan Trofimovitch, a confirmed bachelor, to talk like that, stick up for
his excellency and call me a slanderer. But if you married a pretty young
wife--as you're still such a fine fellow--then I dare say you'd bolt your door
against our prince, and throw up barricades in your house! Why, if only that
Mademoiselle Lebyadkin, who is thrashed with a whip, were not mad and
bandy-legged, by Jove, I should fancy she was the victim of the passions of our
general, and that it was from him that Captain Lebyadkin had suffered 'in his
family dignity,' as he expresses it himself. Only perhaps that is inconsistent
with his refined taste, though, indeed, even that's no hindrance to him. Every
berry is worth picking if only he's in the mood for it. You talk of slander,
but I'm not crying this aloud though the whole town is ringing with it; I only
listen and assent. That's not prohibited."

"The town's ringing with it? What's the town ringing with?"

"That is, Captain Lebyadkin is shouting for all the town to hear, and isn't
that just the same as the market-place ringing with it? How am I to blame? I
interest myself in it only among friends, for, after all, I consider myself
among friends here." He looked at us with an innocent air. "Something's
happened, only consider: they say his excellency has sent three hundred roubles
from Switzerland by a most honourable young lady, and, so to say, modest
orphan, whom I have the honour of knowing, to be handed over to Captain
Lebyadkin. And Lebyadkin, a little later, was told as an absolute fact also by
a very honourable and therefore trustworthy person, I won't say whom, that not
three hundred but a thousand roubles had been sent!... And so, Lebyadkin keeps
crying out 'the young lady has grabbed seven hundred roubles belonging to me,'
and he's almost ready to call in the police; he threatens to, anyway, and he's
making an uproar all over the town."

"This is vile, vile of you!" cried the engineer, leaping up suddenly from his
chair.

"But I say, you are yourself the honourable person who brought word to
Lebyadkin from Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch that a thousand roubles were sent, not
three hundred. Why, the captain told me so himself when he was drunk."

"It's... it's an unhappy misunderstanding. Some one's made a mistake and it's
led to... It's nonsense, and it's base of you."

"But I'm ready to believe that it's nonsense, and I'm distressed at the story,
for, take it as you will, a girl of an honourable reputation is implicated
first over the seven hundred roubles, and secondly in unmistakable intimacy
with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. For how much does it mean to his excellency to
disgrace a girl of good character, or put to shame another man's wife, like
that incident with me? If he comes across a generous-hearted man he'll force
him to cover the sins of others under the shelter of his honourable name.
That's just what I had to put up with, I'm speaking of myself...."

"Be careful, Liputin." Stepan Trofimovitch got up from his easy chair and
turned pale.

"Don't believe it, don't believe it! Somebody has made a mistake and
Lebyadkin's drunk..." exclaimed the engineer in indescribable excitement. "It
will all be explained, but I can't.... And I think it's low.... And that's
enough, enough!"

He ran out of the room.

"What are you about? Why, I'm going with you!" cried Liputin, startled. He
jumped up and ran after Alexey Nilitch.

