# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - IV
[Metadata]: # {01.03.04}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.04}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# IV
[TreeTag]: # {01.03.04.01}
Why he should be lost owing to Liputin I did not know, and indeed I did not
attach much significance to the words; I put it all down to his nerves. His
terror, however, was remarkable, and I made up my mind to keep a careful watch
on him.

The very appearance of Liputin as he came in assured us that he had on this
occasion a special right to come in, in spite of the prohibition. He brought
with him an unknown gentleman, who must have been a new arrival in the town. In
reply to the senseless stare of my petrified friend, he called out immediately
in a loud voice:

"I'm bringing you a visitor, a special one! I make bold to intrude on your
solitude. Mr. Kirillov, a very distinguished civil engineer. And what's more he
knows your son, the much esteemed Pyotr Stepanovitch, very intimately; and he
has a message from him. He's only just arrived."

"The message is your own addition," the visitor observed curtly. "There's no
message at all. But I certainly do know Verhovensky. I left him in the X.
province, ten days ahead of us."

Stepan Trofimovitch mechanically offered his hand and motioned him to sit down.
He looked at me, he looked at Liputin, and then as though suddenly recollecting
himself sat down himself, though he still kept his hat and stick in his hands
without being aware of it.

"Bah, but you were going out yourself! I was told that you were quite knocked
up with work."

"Yes, I'm ill, and you see, I meant to go for a walk, I..." Stepan Trofimovitch
checked himself, quickly flung his hat and stick on the sofa and--turned
crimson.

Meantime, I was hurriedly examining the visitor. He was a young man, about
twenty-seven, decently dressed, well made, slender and dark, with a pale,
rather muddy-coloured face and black lustreless eyes. He seemed rather
thoughtful and absent-minded, spoke jerkily and ungrammatically, transposing
words in rather a strange way, and getting muddled if he attempted a sentence
of any length. Liputin was perfectly aware of Stepan Trofimovitch's alarm, and
was obviously pleased at it. He sat down in a wicker chair which he dragged
almost into the middle of the room, so as to be at an equal distance between
his host and the visitor, who had installed themselves on sofas on opposite
sides of the room. His sharp eyes darted inquisitively from one corner of the
room to another.

"It's.... a long while since I've seen Petrusha.... You met abroad?" Stepan
Trofimovitch managed to mutter to the visitor.

"Both here and abroad."

"Alexey Nilitch has only just returned himself after living four years abroad,"
put in Liputin. "He has been travelling to perfect himself in his speciality
and has come to us because he has good reasons to expect a job on the building
of our railway bridge, and he's now waiting for an answer about it. He knows
the Drozdovs and Lizaveta Nikolaevna, through Pyotr Stepanovitch."

The engineer sat, as it were, with a ruffled air, and listened with awkward
impatience. It seemed to me that he was angry about something.

"He knows Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch too."

"Do you know Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch?" inquired Stepan Trofimovitch.

"I know him too."

"It's... it's a very long time since I've seen Petrusha, and... I feel I have
so little right to call myself a father... _c'est le mot;_ I... how did you
leave him?"

"Oh, yes, I left him... he comes himself," replied Mr. Kirillov, in haste to be
rid of the question again. He certainly was angry.

"He's coming! At last I... you see, it's very long since I've seen Petrusha!"
Stepan Trofimovitch could not get away from this phrase. "Now I expect my poor
boy to whom... to whom I have been so much to blame! That is, I mean to say,
when I left him in Petersburg, I... in short, I looked on him as a nonentity,
_quelque chose dans ce genre._ He was a very nervous boy, you know, emotional,
and... very timid. When he said his prayers going to bed he used to bow down to
the ground, and make the sign of the cross on his pillow that he might not die
in the night.... _Je m'en souviens. Enfin,_ no artistic feeling whatever, not a
sign of anything higher, of anything fundamental, no embryo of a future
ideal..._c'Ã©tait comme un petit idiot,_ but I'm afraid I am incoherent; excuse
me... you came upon me..."

"You say seriously that he crossed his pillow?" the engineer asked suddenly
with marked curiosity.

"Yes, he used to..."

"All right. I just asked. Go on."

Stepan Trofimovitch looked interrogatively at Liputin.

"I'm very grateful to you for your visit. But I must confess I'm... not in a
condition... just now... But allow me to ask where you are lodging."

"At Filipov's, in Bogoyavlensky Street."

"Ach, that's where Shatov lives," I observed involuntarily.

"Just so, in the very same house," cried Liputin, "only Shatov lodges above, in
the attic, while he's down below, at Captain Lebyadkin's. He knows Shatov too,
and he knows Shatov's wife. He was very intimate with her, abroad."

"_Comment!_ Do you really know anything about that unhappy marriage _de ce
pauvre ami_ and that woman," cried Stepan Trofimovitch, carried away by sudden
feeling. "You are the first man I've met who has known her personally; and if
only..."

"What nonsense!" the engineer snapped out, flushing all over. "How you add to
things, Liputin! I've not seen Shatov's wife; I've only once seen her in the
distance and not at all close.... I know Shatov. Why do you add things of all
sorts?"

He turned round sharply on the sofa, clutched his hat, then laid it down again,
and settling himself down once more as before, fixed his angry black eyes on
Stepan Trofimovitch with a sort of defiance. I was at a loss to understand such
strange irritability.

"Excuse me," Stepan Trofimovitch observed impressively. "I understand that it
may be a very delicate subject...."

"No sort of delicate subject in it, and indeed it's shameful, and I didn't
shout at you that it's nonsense, but at Liputin, because he adds things. Excuse
me if you took it to yourself. I know Shatov, but I don't know his wife at
all... I don't know her at all!"

"I understand. I understand. And if I insisted, it's only because I'm very fond
of our poor friend, _notre irascible ami_, and have always taken an interest in
him.... In my opinion that man changed his former, possibly over-youthful but
yet sound ideas, too abruptly. And now he says all sorts of things about _notre
Sainte Russie_ to such a degree that I've long explained this upheaval in his
whole constitution, I can only call it that, to some violent shock in his
family life, and, in fact, to his unsuccessful marriage. I, who know my poor
Russia like the fingers on my hand, and have devoted my whole life to the
Russian people, I can assure you that he does not know the Russian people, and
what's more..."

"I don't know the Russian people at all, either, and I haven't time to study
them," the engineer snapped out again, and again he turned sharply on the sofa.
Stepan Trofimovitch was pulled up in the middle of his speech.

"He is studying them, he is studying them," interposed Liputin. "He has already
begun the study of them, and is writing a very interesting article dealing with
the causes of the increase of suicide in Russia, and, generally speaking, the
causes that lead to the increase or decrease of suicide in society. He has
reached amazing results."

The engineer became dreadfully excited. "You have no right at all," he muttered
wrathfully. "I'm not writing an article. I'm not going to do silly things. I
asked you confidentially, quite by chance. There's no article at all. I'm not
publishing, and you haven't the right..." Liputin was obviously enjoying
himself.

"I beg your pardon, perhaps I made a mistake in calling your literary work an
article. He is only collecting observations, and the essence of the question,
or, so to say, its moral aspect he is not touching at all. And, indeed, he
rejects morality itself altogether, and holds with the last new principle of
general destruction for the sake of ultimate good. He demands already more than
a hundred million heads for the establishment of common sense in Europe; many
more than they demanded at the last Peace Congress. Alexey Nilitch goes further
than anyone in that sense." The engineer listened with a pale and contemptuous
smile. For half a minute every one was silent.

"All this is stupid, Liputin," Mr. Kirillov observed at last, with a certain
dignity. "If I by chance had said some things to you, and you caught them up
again, as you like. But you have no right, for I never speak to anyone. I scorn
to talk.... If one has a conviction then it's clear to me.... But you're doing
foolishly. I don't argue about things when everything's settled. I can't bear
arguing. I never want to argue...."

"And perhaps you are very wise," Stepan Trofimovitch could not resist saying.

"I apologise to you, but I am not angry with anyone here," the visitor went on,
speaking hotly and rapidly. "I have seen few people for four years. For four
years I have talked little and have tried to see no one, for my own objects
which do not concern anyone else, for four years. Liputin found this out and is
laughing. I understand and don't mind. I'm not ready to take offence, only
annoyed at his liberty. And if I don't explain my ideas to you," he concluded
unexpectedly, scanning us all with resolute eyes, "it's not at all that I'm
afraid of your giving information to the government; that's not so; please do
not imagine nonsense of that sort."

No one made any reply to these words. We only looked at each other. Even
Liputin forgot to snigger.

"Gentlemen, I'm very sorry"--Stepan Trofimovitch got up resolutely from the
sofa--"but I feel ill and upset. Excuse me."

"Ach, that's for us to go." Mr. Kirillov started, snatching up his cap. "It's a
good thing you told us. I'm so forgetful."

He rose, and with a good-natured air went up to Stepan Trofimovitch, holding
out his hand.

"I'm sorry you're not well, and I came."

"I wish you every success among us," answered Stepan Trofimovitch, shaking
hands with him heartily and without haste. "I understand that, if as you say
you have lived so long abroad, cutting yourself off from people for objects of
your own and forgetting Russia, you must inevitably look with wonder on us who
are Russians to the backbone, and we must feel the same about you. _Mais cela
passera._ I'm only puzzled at one thing: you want to build our bridge and at
the same time you declare that you hold with the principle of universal
destruction. They won't let you build our bridge."

"What! What's that you said? Ach, I say!" Kirillov cried, much struck, and he
suddenly broke into the most frank and good-humoured laughter. For a moment his
face took a quite childlike expression, which I thought suited him
particularly. Liputin rubbed his hand with delight at Stepan Trofimovitch's
witty remark. I kept wondering to myself why Stepan Trofimovitch was so
frightened of Liputin, and why he had cried out "I am lost" when he heard him
coming.

