# PART I - CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT - VIII
[Metadata]: # {01.05.08}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05.08}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT
VIII
# VIII
First of all I must mention that, for the last two or three minutes Lizaveta
Nikolaevna had seemed to be possessed by a new impulse; she was whispering
something hurriedly to her mother, and to Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who bent down
to listen. Her face was agitated, but at the same time it had a look of
resolution. At last she got up from her seat in evident haste to go away, and
hurried her mother whom Mavriky Nikolaevitch began helping up from her low
chair. But it seemed they were not destined to get away without seeing
everything to the end.

Shatov, who had been forgotten by every one in his corner (not far from
Lizaveta Nikolaevna), and who did not seem to know himself why he went on
sitting there, got up from his chair, and walked, without haste, with resolute
steps right across the room to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, looking him straight in
the face. The latter noticed him approaching at some distance, and faintly
smiled, but when Shatov was close to him he left off smiling.

When Shatov stood still facing him with his eyes fixed on him, and without
uttering a word, every one suddenly noticed it and there was a general hush;
Pyotr Stepanovitch was the last to cease speaking. Liza and her mother were
standing in the middle of the room. So passed five seconds; the look of haughty
astonishment was followed by one of anger on Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's face; he
scowled....

And suddenly Shatov swung his long, heavy arm, and with all his might struck
him a blow in the face. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch staggered violently.

Shatov struck the blow in a peculiar way, not at all after the conventional
fashion (if one may use such an expression). It was not a slap with the palm of
his hand, but a blow with the whole fist, and it was a big, heavy, bony fist
covered with red hairs and freckles. If the blow had struck the nose, it would
have broken it. But it hit him on the cheek, and struck the left corner of the
lip and the upper teeth, from which blood streamed at once.

I believe there was a sudden scream, perhaps Varvara Petrovna screamed--that I
don't remember, because there was a dead hush again; the whole scene did not
last more than ten seconds, however.

Yet a very great deal happened in those seconds.

I must remind the reader again that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's was one of those
natures that know nothing of fear. At a duel he could face the pistol of his
opponent with indifference, and could take aim and kill with brutal coolness.
If anyone had slapped him in the face, I should have expected him not to
challenge his assailant to a duel, but to murder him on the spot. He was just
one of those characters, and would have killed the man, knowing very well what
he was doing, and without losing his self-control. I fancy, indeed, that he
never was liable to those fits of blind rage which deprive a man of all power
of reflection. Even when overcome with intense anger, as he sometimes was, he
was always able to retain complete self-control, and therefore to realise that
he would certainly be sent to penal servitude for murdering a man not in a
duel; nevertheless, he'd have killed any one who insulted him, and without the
faintest hesitation.

I have been studying Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch of late, and through special
circumstances I know a great many facts about him now, at the time I write. I
should compare him, perhaps, with some gentlemen of the past of whom legendary
traditions are still perceived among us. We are told, for instance, about the
Decabrist L--n, that he was always seeking for danger, that he revelled in the
sensation, and that it had become a craving of his nature; that in his youth he
had rushed into duels for nothing; that in Siberia he used to go to kill bears
with nothing but a knife; that in the Siberian forests he liked to meet with
runaway convicts, who are, I may observe in passing, more formidable than
bears. There is no doubt that these legendary gentlemen were capable of a
feeling of fear, and even to an extreme degree, perhaps, or they would have
been a great deal quieter, and a sense of danger would never have become a
physical craving with them. But the conquest of fear was what fascinated them.
The continual ecstasy of vanquishing and the consciousness that no one could
vanquish them was what attracted them. The same L---n struggled with hunger for
some time before he was sent into exile, and toiled to earn his daily bread
simply because he did not care to comply with the requests of his rich father,
which he considered unjust. So his conception of struggle was many-sided, and
he did not prize stoicism and strength of character only in duels and
bear-fights.

But many years have passed since those times, and the nervous, exhausted,
complex character of the men of to-day is incompatible with the craving for
those direct and unmixed sensations which were so sought after by some
restlessly active gentlemen of the good old days. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
would, perhaps, have looked down on L--n, and have called him a boastful
cock-a-hoop coward; it's true he wouldn't have expressed himself aloud.
Stavrogin would have shot his opponent in a duel, and would have faced a bear
if necessary, and would have defended himself from a brigand in the forest as
successfully and as fearlessly as L--n, but it would be without the slightest
thrill of enjoyment, languidly, listlessly, even with ennui and entirely from
unpleasant necessity. In anger, of course, there has been a progress compared
with L--n, even compared with Lermontov. There was perhaps more malignant anger
in Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch than in both put together, but it was a calm, cold,
if one may so say, _reasonable_ anger, and therefore the most revolting and
most terrible possible. I repeat again, I considered him then, and I still
consider him (now that everything is over), a man who, if he received a slap in
the face, or any equivalent insult, would be certain to kill his assailant at
once, on the spot, without challenging him.

Yet, in the present case, what happened was something different and amazing.

He had scarcely regained his balance after being almost knocked over in this
humiliating way, and the horrible, as it were, sodden, thud of the blow in the
face had scarcely died away in the room when he seized Shatov by the shoulders
with both hands, but at once, almost at the same instant, pulled both hands
away and clasped them behind his back. He did not speak, but looked at Shatov,
and turned as white as his shirt. But, strange to say, the light in his eyes
seemed to die out. Ten seconds later his eyes looked cold, and I'm sure I'm not
lying--calm. Only he was terribly pale. Of course I don't know what was passing
within the man, I saw only his exterior. It seems to me that if a man should
snatch up a bar of red-hot iron and hold it tight in his hand to test his
fortitude, and after struggling for ten seconds with insufferable pain end by
overcoming it, such a man would, I fancy, go through something like what
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was enduring during those ten seconds.

Shatov was the first to drop his eyes, and evidently because he was unable to
go on facing him; then he turned slowly and walked out of the room, but with a
very different step. He withdrew quietly, with peculiar awkwardness, with his
shoulders hunched, his head hanging as though he were inwardly pondering
something. I believe he was whispering something. He made his way to the door
carefully, without stumbling against anything or knocking anything over; he
opened the door a very little way, and squeezed through almost sideways. As he
went out his shock of hair standing on end at the back of his head was
particularly noticeable.

Then first of all one fearful scream was heard. I saw Lizaveta Nikolaevna seize
her mother by the shoulder and Mavriky Nikolaevitch by the arm and make two or
three violent efforts to draw them out of the room. But she suddenly uttered a
shriek, and fell full length on the floor, fainting. I can hear the thud of her
head on the carpet to this day.

