# PART I - CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS - III
[Metadata]: # {01.03.03}
[Descriptor]: # {01.03.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER III. THE SINS OF OTHERS
III
# III
But this time to my surprise I found an extraordinary change in him. He pounced
on me with a sort of avidity, it is true, as soon as I went in, and began
listening to me, but with such a distracted air that at first he evidently did
not take in my words. But as soon as I pronounced the name of Karmazinov he
suddenly flew into a frenzy.

"Don't speak of him! Don't pronounce that name!" he exclaimed, almost in a
fury. "Here, look, read it! Read it!"

He opened the drawer and threw on the table three small sheets of paper,
covered with a hurried pencil scrawl, all from Varvara Petrovna. The first
letter was dated the day before yesterday, the second had come yesterday, and
the last that day, an hour before. Their contents were quite trivial, and all
referred to Karmazinov and betrayed the vain and fussy uneasiness of Varvara
Petrovna and her apprehension that Karmazinov might forget to pay her a visit.
Here is the first one dating from two days before. (Probably there had been one
also three days before, and possibly another four days before as well.)

"If he deigns to visit you to-day, not a word about me, I beg. Not the faintest
hint. Don't speak of me, don't mention me.--V. S."

The letter of the day before:

"If he decides to pay you a visit this morning, I think the most dignified
thing would be not to receive him. That's what I think about it; I don't know
what you think.--V. S."

To-day's, the last:

"I feel sure that you're in a regular litter and clouds of tobacco smoke. I'm
sending you Marya and Fomushka. They'll tidy you up in half an hour. And don't
hinder them, but go and sit in the kitchen while they clear up. I'm sending you
a Bokhara rug and two china vases. I've long been meaning to make you a present
of them, and I'm sending you my Teniers, too, for a time! You can put the vases
in the window and hang the Teniers on the right under the portrait of Goethe;
it will be more conspicuous there and it's always light there in the morning.
If he does turn up at last, receive him with the utmost courtesy but try and
talk of trifling matters, of some intellectual subject, and behave as though
you had seen each other lately. Not a word about me. Perhaps I may look in on
you in the evening.--V. S.

"P.S.--If he does not come to-day he won't come at all."

I read and was amazed that he was in such excitement over such trifles. Looking
at him inquiringly, I noticed that he had had time while I was reading to
change the everlasting white tie he always wore, for a red one. His hat and
stick lay on the table. He was pale, and his hands were positively trembling.

"I don't care a hang about her anxieties," he cried frantically, in response to
my inquiring look. "_Je m'en fiche!_ She has the face to be excited about
Karmazinov, and she does not answer my letters. Here is my unopened letter
which she sent me back yesterday, here on the table under the book, under
_L'Homme qui rit_. What is it to me that she's wearing herself out over
Nikolay! _Je m'en fiche, et je proclame ma liberté! Au diable le Karmazinov! Au
diable la Lembke!_ I've hidden the vases in the entry, and the Teniers in the
chest of drawers, and I have demanded that she is to see me at once. Do you
hear. I've insisted! I've sent her just such a scrap of paper, a pencil scrawl,
unsealed, by Nastasya, and I'm waiting. I want Darya Pavlovna to speak to me
with her own lips, before the face of Heaven, or at least before you. _Vous me
seconderez, n'est-ce pas, comme ami et témoin._ I don't want to have to blush,
to lie, I don't want secrets, I won't have secrets in this matter. Let them
confess everything to me openly, frankly, honourably and then... then perhaps I
may surprise the whole generation by my magnanimity.... Am I a scoundrel or
not, my dear sir?" he concluded suddenly, looking menacingly at me, as though
I'd considered him a scoundrel.

I offered him a sip of water; I had never seen him like this before. All the
while he was talking he kept running from one end of the room to the other, but
he suddenly stood still before me in an extraordinary attitude.

"Can you suppose," he began again with hysterical haughtiness, looking me up
and down, "can you imagine that I, Stepan Verhovensky, cannot find in myself
the moral strength to take my bag--my beggar's bag--and laying it on my feeble
shoulders to go out at the gate and vanish forever, when honour and the great
principle of independence demand it! It's not the first time that Stepan
Verhovensky has had to repel despotism by moral force, even though it be the
despotism of a crazy woman, that is, the most cruel and insulting despotism
which can exist on earth, although you have, I fancy, forgotten yourself so
much as to laugh at my phrase, my dear sir! Oh, you don't believe that I can
find the moral strength in myself to end my life as a tutor in a merchant's
family, or to die of hunger in a ditch! Answer me, answer at once; do you
believe it, or don't you believe it?"

But I was purposely silent. I even affected to hesitate to wound him by
answering in the negative, but to be unable to answer affirmatively. In all
this nervous excitement of his there was something which really did offend me,
and not personally, oh, no! But... I will explain later on. He positively
turned pale.

"Perhaps you are bored with me, G----v (this is my surname), and you would
like... not to come and see me at all?" he said in that tone of pale composure
which usually precedes some extraordinary outburst. I jumped up in alarm. At
that moment Nastasya came in, and, without a word, handed Stepan Trofimovitch a
piece of paper, on which something was written in pencil. He glanced at it and
flung it to me. On the paper, in Varvara Petrovna's hand three words were
written: "Stay at home."

Stepan Trofimovitch snatched up his hat and stick in silence and went quickly
out of the room. Mechanically I followed him. Suddenly voices and sounds of
rapid footsteps were heard in the passage. He stood still, as though
thunder-struck.

"It's Liputin; I am lost!" he whispered, clutching at my arm.

At the same instant Liputin walked into the room.

