# PART II - CHAPTER II. NIGHT (continued) - I
[Metadata]: # {02.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.02.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER II. NIGHT (continued)
I
# I
HE WALKED THE LENGTH of Bogoyavlensky Street. At last the road began to go
downhill; his feet slipped in the mud and suddenly there lay open before him a
wide, misty, as it were empty expanse--the river. The houses were replaced by
hovels; the street was lost in a multitude of irregular little alleys.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was a long while making his way between the fences,
keeping close to the river bank, but finding his way confidently, and scarcely
giving it a thought indeed. He was absorbed in something quite different, and
looked round with surprise when suddenly, waking up from a profound reverie, he
found himself almost in the middle of one long, wet, floating bridge.

There was not a soul to be seen, so that it seemed strange to him when
suddenly, almost at his elbow, he heard a deferentially familiar, but rather
pleasant, voice, with a suave intonation, such as is affected by our
over-refined tradespeople or befrizzled young shop assistants.

"Will you kindly allow me, sir, to share your umbrella?"

There actually was a figure that crept under his umbrella, or tried to appear
to do so. The tramp was walking beside him, almost "feeling his elbow," as the
soldiers say. Slackening his pace, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch bent down to look
more closely, as far as he could, in the darkness. It was a short man, and
seemed like an artisan who had been drinking; he was shabbily and scantily
dressed; a cloth cap, soaked by the rain and with the brim half torn off,
perched on his shaggy, curly head. He looked a thin, vigorous, swarthy man with
dark hair; his eyes were large and must have been black, with a hard glitter
and a yellow tinge in them, like a gipsy's; that could be divined even in the
darkness. He was about forty, and was not drunk.

"Do you know me?" asked Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. "Mr. Stavrogin, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. You were pointed out to me at the station, when the train
stopped last Sunday, though I had heard enough of you beforehand."

"From Pyotr Stepanovitch? Are you... Fedka the convict?"

"I was christened Fyodor Fyodorovitch. My mother is living to this day in these
parts; she's an old woman, and grows more and more bent every day. She prays to
God for me, day and night, so that she doesn't waste her old age lying on the
stove."

"You escaped from prison?"

"I've had a change of luck. I gave up books and bells and church-going because
I'd a life sentence, so that I had a very long time to finish my term."

"What are you doing here?"

"Well, I do what I can. My uncle, too, died last week in prison here. He was
there for false coin, so I threw two dozen stones at the dogs by way of
memorial. That's all I've been doing so far. Moreover Pyotr Stepanovitch gives
me hopes of a passport, and a merchant's one, too, to go all over Russia, so
I'm waiting on his kindness. 'Because,' says he, 'my papa lost you at cards at
the English club, and I,' says he, 'find that inhumanity unjust.' You might
have the kindness to give me three roubles, sir, for a glass to warm myself."

"So you've been spying on me. I don't like that. By whose orders?"

"As to orders, it's nothing of the sort; it's simply that I knew of your
benevolence, which is known to all the world. All we get, as you know, is an
armful of hay, or a prod with a fork. Last Friday I filled myself as full of
pie as Martin did of soap; since then I didn't eat one day, and the day after I
fasted, and on the third I'd nothing again. I've had my fill of water from the
river. I'm breeding fish in my belly.... So won't your honour give me
something? I've a sweetheart expecting me not far from here, but I daren't show
myself to her without money."

"What did Pyotr Stepanovitch promise you from me?"

"He didn't exactly promise anything, but only said that I might be of use to
your honour if my luck turns out good, but how exactly he didn't explain; for
Pyotr Stepanovitch wants to see if I have the patience of a Cossack, and feels
no sort of confidence in me."

"Why?"

"Pyotr Stepanovitch is an astronomer, and has learnt all God's planets, but
even he may be criticised. I stand before you, sir, as before God, because I
have heard so much about you. Pyotr Stepanovitch is one thing, but you, sir,
maybe, are something else. When he's said of a man he's a scoundrel, he knows
nothing more about him except that he's a scoundrel. Or if he's said he's a
fool, then that man has no calling with him except that of fool. But I may be a
fool Tuesday and Wednesday, and on Thursday wiser than he. Here now he knows
about me that I'm awfully sick to get a passport, for there's no getting on in
Russia without papers--so he thinks that he's snared my soul. I tell you, sir,
life's a very easy business for Pyotr Stepanovitch, for he fancies a man to be
this and that, and goes on as though he really was. And, what's more, he's
beastly stingy. It's his notion that, apart from him, I daren't trouble you,
but I stand before you, sir, as before God. This is the fourth night I've been
waiting for your honour on this bridge, to show that I can find my own way on
the quiet, without him. I'd better bow to a boot, thinks I, than to a peasant's
shoe."

"And who told you that I was going to cross the bridge at night?"

"Well, that, I'll own, came out by chance, most through Captain Lebyadkin's
foolishness, because he can't keep anything to himself.... So that three
roubles from your honour would pay me for the weary time I've had these three
days and nights. And the clothes I've had soaked, I feel that too much to speak
of it."

"I'm going to the left; you'll go to the right. Here's the end of the bridge.
Listen, Fyodor; I like people to understand what I say, once for all. I won't
give you a farthing. Don't meet me in future on the bridge or anywhere. I've no
need of you, and never shall have, and if you don't obey, I'll tie you and take
you to the police. March!"

"Eh-heh! Fling me something for my company, anyhow. I've cheered you on your
way."

"Be off!"

"But do you know the way here? There are all sorts of turnings.... I could
guide you; for this town is for all the world as though the devil carried it in
his basket and dropped it in bits here and there."

"I'll tie you up!" said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, turning upon him menacingly.

"Perhaps you'll change your mind, sir; it's easy to ill-treat the helpless."

"Well, I see you can rely on yourself!"

"I rely upon you, sir, and not very much on myself...."

"I've no need of you at all. I've told you so already."

"But I have need, that's how it is! I shall wait for you on the way back.
There's nothing for it."

"I give you my word of honour if I meet you I'll tie you up."

"Well, I'll get a belt ready for you to tie me with. A lucky journey to you,
sir. You kept the helpless snug under your umbrella. For that alone I'll be
grateful to you to my dying day." He fell behind. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch
walked on to his destination, feeling disturbed. This man who had dropped from
the sky was absolutely convinced that he was indispensable to him, Stavrogin,
and was in insolent haste to tell him so. He was being treated unceremoniously
all round. But it was possible, too, that the tramp had not been altogether
lying, and had tried to force his services upon him on his own initiative,
without Pyotr Stepanovitch's knowledge, and that would be more curious still.

