# PART I - CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT - III
[Metadata]: # {01.05.03}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT
III
# III
"Ach, here!" Praskovya Ivanovna indicated an easy chair near the table and sank
heavily into it with the assistance of Mavriky Nikolaevitch. "I wouldn't have
sat down in your house, my lady, if it weren't for my legs," she added in a
breaking voice.

Varvara Petrovna raised her head a little, and with an expression of suffering
pressed the fingers of her right hand to her right temple, evidently in acute
pain _(tic douloureux)_.

"Why so, Praskovya Ivanovna; why wouldn't you sit down in my house? I possessed
your late husband's sincere friendship all his life; and you and I used to play
with our dolls at school together as girls."

Praskovya Ivanovna waved her hands.

"I knew that was coming! You always begin about the school when you want to
reproach me--that's your way. But to my thinking that's only fine talk. I can't
stand the school you're always talking about."

"You've come in rather a bad temper, I'm afraid; how are your legs? Here
they're bringing you some coffee, please have some, drink it and don't be
cross."

"Varvara Petrovna, you treat me as though I were a child. I won't have any
coffee, so there!"

And she pettishly waved away the footman who was bringing her coffee. (All the
others refused coffee too except Mavriky Nikolaevitch and me. Stepan
Trofimovitch took it, but put it aside on the table. Though Marya Timofyevna
was very eager to have another cup and even put out her hand to take it, on
second thoughts she refused it ceremoniously, and was obviously pleased with
herself for doing so.)

Varvara Petrovna gave a wry smile.

"I'll tell you what it is, Praskovya Ivanovna, my friend, you must have taken
some fancy into your head again, and that's why you've come. You've simply
lived on fancies all your life. You flew into a fury at the mere mention of our
school; but do you remember how you came and persuaded all the class that a
hussar called Shablykin had proposed to you, and how Mme. Lefebure proved on
the spot you were lying. Yet you weren't lying, you were simply imagining it
all to amuse yourself. Come, tell me, what is it now? What are you fancying
now; what is it vexes you?"

"And you fell in love with the priest who used to teach us scripture at
school--so much for you, since you've such a spiteful memory. Ha ha ha!"

She laughed viciously and went off into a fit of coughing.

"Ah, you've not forgotten the priest then..." said Varvara Petrovna, looking at
her vindictively.

Her face turned green. Praskovya Ivanovna suddenly assumed a dignified air.

"I'm in no laughing mood now, madam. Why have you drawn my daughter into your
scandals in the face of the whole town? That's what I've come about."

"My scandals?" Varvara Petrovna drew herself up menacingly.

"Maman, I entreat you too, to restrain yourself," Lizaveta Nikolaevna brought
out suddenly.

"What's that you say?" The maman was on the point of breaking into a squeal
again, but catching her daughter's flashing eye, she subsided suddenly.

"How could you talk about scandal, maman?" cried Liza, flushing red. "I came of
my own accord with Yulia Mihailovna's permission, because I wanted to learn
this unhappy woman's story and to be of use to her."

"This unhappy woman's story!" Praskovya Ivanovna drawled with a spiteful laugh.
"Is it your place to mix yourself up with such 'stories.' Ach, enough of your
tyrannising!" She turned furiously to Varvara Petrovna. "I don't know whether
it's true or not, they say you keep the whole town in order, but it seems your
turn has come at last."

Varvara Petrovna sat straight as an arrow ready to fly from the bow. For ten
seconds she looked sternly and immovably at Praskovya Ivanovna.

"Well, Praskovya, you must thank God that all here present are our friends,"
she said at last with ominous composure. "You've said a great deal better
unsaid."

"But I'm not so much afraid of what the world will say, my lady, as some
people. It's you who, under a show of pride, are trembling at what people will
say. And as for all here being your friends, it's better for you than if
strangers had been listening."

"Have you grown wiser during this last week?"

"It's not that I've grown wiser, but simply that the truth has come out this
week."

"What truth has come out this week? Listen, Praskovya Ivanovna, don't irritate
me. Explain to me this minute, I beg you as a favour, what truth has come out
and what do you mean by that?"

"Why there it is, sitting before you!" and Praskovya Ivanovna suddenly pointed
at Marya Timofyevna with that desperate determination which takes no heed of
consequences, if only it can make an impression at the moment. Marya
Timofyevna, who had watched her all the time with light-hearted curiosity,
laughed exultingly at the sight of the wrathful guest's finger pointed
impetuously at her, and wriggled gleefully in her easy chair.

"God Almighty have mercy on us, they've all gone crazy!" exclaimed Varvara
Petrovna, and turning pale she sank back in her chair.

She turned so pale that it caused some commotion. Stepan Trofimovitch was the
first to rush up to her. I drew near also; even Liza got up from her seat,
though she did not come forward. But the most alarmed of all was Praskovya
Ivanovna herself. She uttered a scream, got up as far as she could and almost
wailed in a lachrymose voice:

"Varvara Petrovna, dear, forgive me for my wicked foolishness! Give her some
water, somebody."

"Don't whimper, please, Praskovya Ivanovna, and leave me alone, gentlemen,
please, I don't want any water!" Varvara Petrovna pronounced in a firm though
low voice, with blanched lips.

"Varvara Petrovna, my dear," Praskovya Ivanovna went on, a little reassured,
"though I am to blame for my reckless words, what's upset me more than anything
are these anonymous letters that some low creatures keep bombarding me with;
they might write to you, since it concerns you, but I've a daughter!"

Varvara Petrovna looked at her in silence, with wide-open eyes, listening with
wonder. At that moment a side-door in the corner opened noiselessly, and Darya
Pavlovna made her appearance. She stood still and looked round. She was struck
by our perturbation. Probably she did not at first distinguish Marya
Timofyevna, of whose presence she had not been informed. Stepan Trofimovitch
was the first to notice her; he made a rapid movement, turned red, and for some
reason proclaimed in a loud voice: "Darya Pavlovna!" so that all eyes turned on
the new-comer.

"Oh, is this your Darya Pavlovna!" cried Marya Timofyevna. "Well, Shatushka,
your sister's not like you. How can my fellow call such a charmer the
serf-wench Dasha?"

Meanwhile Darya Pavlovna had gone up to Varvara Petrovna, but struck by Marya
Timofyevna's exclamation she turned quickly and stopped just before her chair,
looking at the imbecile with a long fixed gaze.

"Sit down, Dasha," Varvara Petrovna brought out with terrifying composure.
"Nearer, that's right. You can see this woman, sitting down. Do you know her?"

"I have never seen her," Dasha answered quietly, and after a pause she added at
once:

"She must be the invalid sister of Captain Lebyadkin."

"And it's the first time I've set eyes on you, my love, though I've been
interested and wanted to know you a long time, for I see how well-bred you are
in every movement you make," Marya Timofyevna cried enthusiastically. "And
though my footman swears at you, can such a well-educated charming person as
you really have stolen money from him? For you are sweet, sweet, sweet, I tell
you that from myself!" she concluded, enthusiastically waving her hand.

"Can you make anything of it?" Varvara Petrovna asked with proud dignity.

"I understand it...."

"Have you heard about the money?"

"No doubt it's the money that I undertook at Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's request
to hand over to her brother, Captain Lebyadkin."

A silence followed.

"Did Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch himself ask you to do so?"

"He was very anxious to send that money, three hundred roubles, to Mr.
Lebyadkin. And as he didn't know his address, but only knew that he was to be
in our town, he charged me to give it to Mr. Lebyadkin if he came."

"What is the money... lost? What was this woman speaking about just now?"

"That I don't know. I've heard before that Mr. Lebyadkin says I didn't give him
all the money, but I don't understand his words. There were three hundred
roubles and I sent him three hundred roubles."

Darya Pavlovna had almost completely regained her composure. And it was
difficult, I may mention, as a rule, to astonish the girl or ruffle her calm
for long--whatever she might be feeling. She brought out all her answers now
without haste, replied immediately to every question with accuracy, quietly,
smoothly, and without a trace of the sudden emotion she had shown at first, or
the slightest embarrassment which might have suggested a consciousness of
guilt. Varvara Petrovna's eyes were fastened upon her all the time she was
speaking. Varvara Petrovna thought for a minute:

"If," she pronounced at last firmly, evidently addressing all present, though
she only looked at Dasha, "if Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch did not appeal even to me
but asked you to do this for him, he must have had his reasons for doing so. I
don't consider I have any right to inquire into them, if they are kept secret
from me. But the very fact of your having taken part in the matter reassures me
on that score, be sure of that, Darya, in any case. But you see, my dear, you
may, through ignorance of the world, have quite innocently done something
imprudent; and you did so when you undertook to have dealings with a low
character. The rumours spread by this rascal show what a mistake you made. But
I will find out about him, and as it is my task to protect you, I shall know
how to defend you. But now all this must be put a stop to."

"The best thing to do," said Marya Timofyevna, popping up from her chair, "is
to send him to the footmen's room when he comes. Let him sit on the benches
there and play cards with them while we sit here and drink coffee. We might
send him a cup of coffee too, but I have a great contempt for him."

And she wagged her head expressively.

"We must put a stop to this," Varvara Petrovna repeated, listening attentively
to Marya Timofyevna. "Ring, Stepan Trofimovitch, I beg you."

Stepan Trofimovitch rang, and suddenly stepped forward, all excitement.

"If... if..." he faltered feverishly, flushing, breaking off and stuttering,
"if I too have heard the most revolting story, or rather slander, it was with
utter indignation..._enfin c'est un homme perdu, et quelque chose comme un
forçat evadé...._"

He broke down and could not go on. Varvara Petrovna, screwing up her eyes,
looked him up and down.

The ceremonious butler Alexey Yegorytch came in.

"The carriage," Varvara Petrovna ordered. "And you, Alexey Yegorytch, get ready
to escort Miss Lebyadkin home; she will give you the address herself."

"Mr. Lebyadkin has been waiting for her for some time downstairs, and has been
begging me to announce him."

"That's impossible, Varvara Petrovna!" and Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had sat
all the time in unbroken silence, suddenly came forward in alarm. "If I may
speak, he is not a man who can be admitted into society. He... he... he's an
impossible person, Varvara Petrovna!"

"Wait a moment," said Varvara Petrovna to Alexey Yegorytch, and he disappeared
at once.

_"C'est un homme malhonnête et je crois même que c'est un forçat evadé ou
quelque chose dans ce genre,"_ Stepan Trofimovitch muttered again, and again he
flushed red and broke off.

"Liza, it's time we were going," announced Praskovya Ivanovna disdainfully,
getting up from her seat. She seemed sorry that in her alarm she had called
herself a fool. While Darya Pavlovna was speaking, she listened, pressing her
lips superciliously. But what struck me most was the expression of Lizaveta
Nikolaevna from the moment Darya Pavlovna had come in. There was a gleam of
hatred and hardly disguised contempt in her eyes.

"Wait one minute, Praskovya Ivanovna, I beg you." Varvara Petrovna detained
her, still with the same exaggerated composure. "Kindly sit down. I intend to
speak out, and your legs are bad. That's right, thank you. I lost my temper
just now and uttered some impatient words. Be so good as to forgive me. I
behaved foolishly and I'm the first to regret it, because I like fairness in
everything. Losing your temper too, of course, you spoke of certain anonymous
letters. Every anonymous communication is deserving of contempt, just because
it's not signed. If you think differently I'm sorry for you. In any case, if I
were in your place, I would not pry into such dirty corners, I would not soil
my hands with it. But you have soiled yours. However, since you have begun on
the subject yourself, I must tell you that six days ago I too received a
clownish anonymous letter. In it some rascal informs me that Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch has gone out of his mind, and that I have reason to fear some
lame woman, who 'is destined to play a great part in my life.' I remember the
expression. Reflecting and being aware that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch has very
numerous enemies, I promptly sent for a man living here, one of his secret
enemies, and the most vindictive and contemptible of them, and from my
conversation with him I gathered what was the despicable source of the
anonymous letter. If you too, my poor Praskovya Ivanovna, have been worried by
similar letters on my account, and as you say 'bombarded' with them, I am, of
course, the first to regret having been the innocent cause of it. That's all I
wanted to tell you by way of explanation. I'm very sorry to see that you are so
tired and so upset. Besides, I have quite made up my mind to see that
suspicious personage of whom Mavriky Nikolaevitch said just now, a little
inappropriately, that it was impossible to receive him. Liza in particular need
have nothing to do with it. Come to me, Liza, my dear, let me kiss you again."

Liza crossed the room and stood in silence before Varvara Petrovna. The latter
kissed her, took her hands, and, holding her at arm's-length, looked at her
with feeling, then made the sign of the cross over her and kissed her again.

"Well, good-bye, Liza" (there was almost the sound of tears in Varvara
Petrovna's voice), "believe that I shall never cease to love you whatever fate
has in store for you. God be with you. I have always blessed His Holy Will...."

She would have added something more, but restrained herself and broke off. Liza
was walking back to her place, still in the same silence, as it were plunged in
thought, but she suddenly stopped before her mother.

"I am not going yet, mother. I'll stay a little longer at auntie's," she
brought out in a low voice, but there was a note of iron determination in those
quiet words.

"My goodness! What now?" wailed Praskovya Ivanovna, clasping her hands
helplessly. But Liza did not answer, and seemed indeed not to hear her; she sat
down in the same corner and fell to gazing into space again as before.

There was a look of pride and triumph in Varvara Petrovna's face.

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch, I have a great favour to ask of you. Be so kind as to go
and take a look at that person downstairs, and if there is any possibility of
admitting him, bring him up here."

Mavriky Nikolaevitch bowed and went out. A moment later he brought in Mr.
Lebyadkin.

