# PART II - CHAPTER I. NIGHT - II
[Metadata]: # {02.01.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {02.01.02.01}
Pyotr Stepanovitch ran round to see his father twice, but unfortunately I was
absent on both occasions. He visited him for the first time only on Wednesday,
that is, not till the fourth day after their first meeting, and then only on
business. Their difficulties over the property were settled, by the way,
without fuss or publicity. Varvara Petrovna took it all on herself, and paid
all that was owing, taking over the land, of course, and only informed Stepan
Trofimovitch that it was all settled and her butler, Alexey Yegorytch, was, by
her authorisation, bringing him something to sign. This Stepan Trofimovitch
did, in silence, with extreme dignity. Apropos of his dignity, I may mention
that I hardly recognised my old friend during those days. He behaved as he had
never done before; became amazingly taciturn and had not even written one
letter to Varvara Petrovna since Sunday, which seemed to me almost a miracle.
What's more, he had become quite calm. He had fastened upon a final and
decisive idea which gave him tranquillity. That was evident. He had hit upon
this idea, and sat still, expecting something. At first, however, he was ill,
especially on Monday. He had an attack of his summer cholera. He could not
remain all that time without news either; but as soon as I departed from the
statement of facts, and began discussing the case in itself, and formulated any
theory, he at once gesticulated to me to stop. But both his interviews with his
son had a distressing effect on him, though they did not shake his
determination. After each interview he spent the whole day lying on the sofa
with a handkerchief soaked in vinegar on his head. But he continued to remain
calm in the deepest sense.

Sometimes, however, he did not hinder my speaking. Sometimes, too, it seemed to
me that the mysterious determination he had taken seemed to be failing him and
he appeared to be struggling with a new, seductive stream of ideas. That was
only at moments, but I made a note of it. I suspected that he was longing to
assert himself again, to come forth from his seclusion, to show fight, to
struggle to the last.

"_Cher,_ I could crush them!" broke from him on Thursday evening after his
second interview with Pyotr Stepanovitch, when he lay stretched on the sofa
with his head wrapped in a towel.

Till that moment he had not uttered one word all day.

_"Fils, fils, cher,"_ and so on, "I agree all those expressions are nonsense,
kitchen talk, and so be it. I see it for myself. I never gave him food or
drink, I sent him a tiny baby from Berlin to X province by post, and all that,
I admit it.... 'You gave me neither food nor drink, and sent me by post,' he
says, 'and what's more you've robbed me here.'"


"'But you unhappy boy,' I cried to him, 'my heart has been aching for you all
my life; though I did send you by post.' _Il rit._"

"But I admit it. I admit it, granted it was by post," he concluded, almost in
delirium.

_"Passons,"_ he began again, five minutes later. "I don't understand Turgenev.
That Bazarov of his is a fictitious figure, it does not exist anywhere. The
fellows themselves were the first to disown him as unlike anyone. That Bazarov
is a sort of indistinct mixture of Nozdryov and Byron, _c'est le mot._ Look at
them attentively: they caper about and squeal with joy like puppies in the sun.
They are happy, they are victorious! What is there of Byron in them!... and
with that, such ordinariness! What a low-bred, irritable vanity! What an abject
craving to _faire du bruit autour de son nom,_ without noticing that _son
nom...._ Oh, it's a caricature! 'Surely,' I cried to him, 'you don't want to
offer yourself just as you are as a substitute for Christ?' _Il rit. Il rit
beaucoup. Il rit trop._ He has a strange smile. His mother had not a smile like
that. _Il rit toujours._"

Silence followed again.

"They are cunning; they were acting in collusion on Sunday," he blurted out
suddenly....

"Oh, not a doubt of it," I cried, pricking up my ears. "It was a got-up thing
and it was too transparent, and so badly acted."

"I don't mean that. Do you know that it was all too transparent on purpose,
that those... who had to, might understand it. Do you understand that?"

"I don't understand."

"_Tant mieux; passons._ I am very irritable to-day."

"But why have you been arguing with him, Stepan Trofimovitch?" I asked him
reproachfully.

"_Je voulais convertir_--you'll laugh of course--_cette pauvre_ auntie, _elle
entendra de belles choses!_ Oh, my dear boy, would you believe it. I felt like
a patriot. I always recognised that I was a Russian, however... a genuine
Russian must be like you and me. _Il y a là dedans quelque chose d'aveugle et
de louche._"

"Not a doubt of it," I assented.

"My dear, the real truth always sounds improbable, do you know that? To make
truth sound probable you must always mix in some falsehood with it. Men have
always done so. Perhaps there's something in it that passes our understanding.
What do you think: is there something we don't understand in that triumphant
squeal? I should like to think there was. I should like to think so."

I did not speak. He, too, was silent for a long time. "They say that French
cleverness..." he babbled suddenly, as though in a fever... "that's false, it
always has been. Why libel French cleverness? It's simply Russian indolence,
our degrading impotence to produce ideas, our revolting parasitism in the rank
of nations. _Ils sont tout simplement des paresseux,_ and not French
cleverness. Oh, the Russians ought to be extirpated for the good of humanity,
like noxious parasites! We've been striving for something utterly, utterly
different. I can make nothing of it. I have given up understanding. 'Do you
understand,' I cried to him, 'that if you have the guillotine in the foreground
of your programme and are so enthusiastic about it too, it's simply because
nothing's easier than cutting off heads, and nothing's harder than to have an
idea. _Vous êtes des paresseux! Votre drapeau est un guenille, une
impuissance._ It's those carts, or, what was it?... the rumble of the carts
carrying bread to humanity being more important than the Sistine Madonna, or,
what's the saying?... _une bêtise dans ce genre._ Don't you understand, don't
you understand,' I said to him, 'that unhappiness is just as necessary to man
as happiness.' _Il rit._ 'All you do is to make a _bon mot,_' he said, 'with
your limbs snug on a velvet sofa.'... (He used a coarser expression.) And this
habit of addressing a father so familiarly is very nice when father and son are
on good terms, but what do you think of it when they are abusing one another?"

We were silent again for a minute.

_"Cher,"_ he concluded at last, getting up quickly, "do you know this is bound
to end in something?"

"Of course," said I.

"_Vous ne comprenez pas. Passons._ But... usually in our world things come to
nothing, but this will end in something; it's bound to, it's bound to!"

He got up, and walked across the room in violent emotion, and coming back to
the sofa sank on to it exhausted.

On Friday morning, Pyotr Stepanovitch went off somewhere in the neighbourhood,
and remained away till Monday. I heard of his departure from Liputin, and in
the course of conversation I learned that the Lebyadkins, brother and sister,
had moved to the riverside quarter. "I moved them," he added, and, dropping the
Lebyadkins, he suddenly announced to me that Lizaveta Nikolaevna was going to
marry Mavriky Nikolaevitch, that, although it had not been announced, the
engagement was a settled thing. Next day I met Lizaveta Nikolaevna out riding
with Mavriky Nikolaevitch; she was out for the first time after her illness.
She beamed at me from the distance, laughed, and nodded in a very friendly way.
I told all this to Stepan Trofimovitch; he paid no attention, except to the
news about the Lebyadkins.

And now, having described our enigmatic position throughout those eight days
during which we knew nothing, I will pass on to the description of the
succeeding incidents of my chronicle, writing, so to say, with full knowledge,
and describing things as they became known afterwards, and are clearly seen
to-day. I will begin with the eighth day after that Sunday, that is, the Monday
evening--for in reality a "new scandal" began with that evening.

