# PART II - CHAPTER VII. A MEETING - I
[Metadata]: # {02.07.01}
[Descriptor]: # {02.07.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER VII. A MEETING
I
# I
VIRGINSKY LIVED IN HIS OWN house, or rather his wife's, in Muravyin Street. It
was a wooden house of one story, and there were no lodgers in it. On the
pretext of Virginsky's-name-day party, about fifteen guests were assembled; but
the entertainment was not in the least like an ordinary provincial name-day
party. From the very beginning of their married life the husband and wife had
agreed once for all that it was utterly stupid to invite friends to celebrate
name-days, and that "there is nothing to rejoice about in fact." In a few years
they had succeeded in completely cutting themselves off from all society.
Though he was a man of some ability, and by no means very poor, he somehow
seemed to every one an eccentric fellow who was fond of solitude, and, what's
more, "stuck up in conversation." Madame Virginsky was a midwife by
profession--and by that very fact was on the lowest rung of the social ladder,
lower even than the priest's wife in spite of her husband's rank as an officer.
But she was conspicuously lacking in the humility befitting her position. And
after her very stupid and unpardonably open liaison on principle with Captain
Lebyadkin, a notorious rogue, even the most indulgent of our ladies turned away
from her with marked contempt. But Madame Virginsky accepted all this as though
it were what she wanted. It is remarkable that those very ladies applied to
Arina Prohorovna (that is, Madame Virginsky) when they were in an interesting
condition, rather than to any one of the other three _accoucheuses_ of the
town. She was sent for even by country families living in the neighbourhood, so
great was the belief in her knowledge, luck, and skill in critical cases. It
ended in her practising only among the wealthiest ladies; she was greedy of
money. Feeling her power to the full, she ended by not putting herself out for
anyone. Possibly on purpose, indeed, in her practice in the best houses she
used to scare nervous patients by the most incredible and nihilistic disregard
of good manners, or by jeering at "everything holy," at the very time when
"everything holy" might have come in most useful. Our town doctor, Rozanov--he
too was an _accoucheur_--asserted most positively that on one occasion when a
patient in labour was crying out and calling on the name of the Almighty, a
free-thinking sally from Arina Prohorovna, fired off like a pistol-shot, had so
terrifying an effect on the patient that it greatly accelerated her delivery.

But though she was a nihilist, Madame Virginsky did not, when occasion arose,
disdain social or even old-fashioned superstitions and customs if they could be
of any advantage to herself. She would never, for instance, have stayed away
from a baby's christening, and always put on a green silk dress with a train
and adorned her chignon with curls and ringlets for such events, though at
other times she positively revelled in slovenliness. And though during the
ceremony she always maintained "the most insolent air," so that she put the
clergy to confusion, yet when it was over she invariably handed champagne to
the guests (it was for that that she came and dressed up), and it was no use
trying to take the glass without a contribution to her "porridge bowl."

The guests who assembled that evening at Virginsky's (mostly men) had a casual
and exceptional air. There was no supper nor cards. In the middle of the large
drawing-room, which was papered with extremely old blue paper, two tables had
been put together and covered with a large though not quite clean table-cloth,
and on them two samovars were boiling. The end of the table was taken up by a
huge tray with twenty-five glasses on it and a basket with ordinary French
bread cut into a number of slices, as one sees it in genteel boarding-schools
for boys or girls. The tea was poured out by a maiden lady of thirty, Arina
Prohorovna's sister, a silent and malevolent creature, with flaxen hair and no
eyebrows, who shared her sister's progressive ideas and was an object of terror
to Virginsky himself in domestic life. There were only three ladies in the
room: the lady of the house, her eyebrowless sister, and Virginsky's sister, a
girl who had just arrived from Petersburg. Arina Prohorovna, a good-looking and
buxom woman of seven-and-twenty, rather dishevelled, in an everyday greenish
woollen dress, was sitting scanning the guests with her bold eyes, and her look
seemed in haste to say, "You see I am not in the least afraid of anything."
Miss Virginsky, a rosy-cheeked student and a nihilist, who was also
good-looking, short, plump and round as a little ball, had settled herself
beside Arina Prohorovna, almost in her travelling clothes. She held a roll of
paper in her hand, and scrutinised the guests with impatient and roving eyes.
Virginsky himself was rather unwell that evening, but he came in and sat in an
easy chair by the tea-table. All the guests were sitting down too, and the
orderly way in which they were ranged on chairs suggested a meeting. Evidently
all were expecting something and were filling up the interval with loud but
irrelevant conversation. When Stavrogin and Verhovensky appeared there was a
sudden hush.

But I must be allowed to give a few explanations to make things clear.

I believe that all these people had come together in the agreeable expectation
of hearing something particularly interesting, and had notice of it beforehand.
They were the flower of the reddest Radicalism of our ancient town, and had
been carefully picked out by Virginsky for this "meeting." I may remark, too,
that some of them (though not very many) had never visited him before. Of
course most of the guests had no clear idea why they had been summoned. It was
true that at that time all took Pyotr Stepanovitch for a fully authorised
emissary from abroad; this idea had somehow taken root among them at once and
naturally flattered them. And yet among the citizens assembled ostensibly to
keep a name-day, there were some who had been approached with definite
proposals. Pyotr Verhovensky had succeeded in getting together a "quintet"
amongst us like the one he had already formed in Moscow and, as appeared later,
in our province among the officers. It was said that he had another in X
province. This quintet of the elect were sitting now at the general table, and
very skilfully succeeded in giving themselves the air of being quite ordinary
people, so that no one could have known them. They were--since it is no longer
a secret--first Liputin, then Virginsky himself, then Shigalov (a gentleman
with long ears, the brother of Madame Virginsky), Lyamshin, and lastly a
strange person called Tolkatchenko, a man of forty, who was famed for his vast
knowledge of the people, especially of thieves and robbers. He used to frequent
the taverns on purpose (though not only with the object of studying the
people), and plumed himself on his shabby clothes, tarred boots, and crafty
wink and a flourish of peasant phrases. Lyamshin had once or twice brought him
to Stepan Trofimovitch's gatherings, where, however, he did not make a great
sensation. He used to make his appearance in the town from time to time,
chiefly when he was out of a job; he was employed on the railway.

Every one of these fine champions had formed this first group in the fervent
conviction that their quintet was only one of hundreds and thousands of similar
groups scattered all over Russia, and that they all depended on some immense
central but secret power, which in its turn was intimately connected with the
revolutionary movement all over Europe. But I regret to say that even at that
time there was beginning to be dissension among them. Though they had ever
since the spring been expecting Pyotr Verhovensky, whose coming had been
heralded first by Tolkatchenko and then by the arrival of Shigalov, though they
had expected extraordinary miracles from him, and though they had responded to
his first summons without the slightest criticism, yet they had no sooner
formed the quintet than they all somehow seemed to feel insulted; and I really
believe it was owing to the promptitude with which they consented to join. They
had joined, of course, from a not ignoble feeling of shame, for fear people
might say afterwards that they had not dared to join; still they felt Pyotr
Verhovensky ought to have appreciated their heroism and have rewarded it by
telling them some really important bits of news at least. But Verhovensky was
not at all inclined to satisfy their legitimate curiosity, and told them
nothing but what was necessary; he treated them in general with great sternness
and even rather casually. This was positively irritating, and Comrade Shigalov
was already egging the others on to insist on his "explaining himself," though,
of course, not at Virginsky's, where so many outsiders were present.

I have an idea that the above-mentioned members of the first quintet were
disposed to suspect that among the guests of Virginsky's that evening some were
members of other groups, unknown to them, belonging to the same secret
organisation and founded in the town by the same Verhovensky; so that in fact
all present were suspecting one another, and posed in various ways to one
another, which gave the whole party a very perplexing and even romantic air.
Yet there were persons present who were beyond all suspicion. For instance, a
major in the service, a near relation of Virginsky, a perfectly innocent person
who had not been invited but had come of himself for the name-day celebration,
so that it was impossible not to receive him. But Virginsky was quite
unperturbed, as the major was "incapable of betraying them"; for in spite of
his stupidity he had all his life been fond of dropping in wherever extreme
Radicals met; he did not sympathise with their ideas himself, but was very fond
of listening to them. What's more, he had even been compromised indeed. It had
happened in his youth that whole bundles of manifestoes and of numbers of _The
Bell_ had passed through his hands, and although he had been afraid even to
open them, yet he would have considered it absolutely contemptible to refuse to
distribute them--and there are such people in Russia even to this day.

The rest of the guests were either types of honourable amour-propre crushed and
embittered, or types of the generous impulsiveness of ardent youth. There were
two or three teachers, of whom one, a lame man of forty-five, a master in the
high school, was a very malicious and strikingly vain person; and two or three
officers. Of the latter, one very young artillery officer who had only just
come from a military training school, a silent lad who had not yet made friends
with anyone, turned up now at Virginsky's with a pencil in his hand, and,
scarcely taking any part in the conversation, continually made notes in his
notebook. Everybody saw this, but every one pretended not to. There was, too,
an idle divinity student who had helped Lyamshin to put indecent photographs
into the gospel-woman's pack. He was a solid youth with a free-and-easy though
mistrustful manner, with an unchangeably satirical smile, together with a calm
air of triumphant faith in his own perfection. There was also present, I don't
know why, the mayor's son, that unpleasant and prematurely exhausted youth to
whom I have referred already in telling the story of the lieutenant's little
wife. He was silent the whole evening. Finally there was a very enthusiastic
and tousle-headed schoolboy of eighteen, who sat with the gloomy air of a young
man whose dignity has been wounded, evidently distressed by his eighteen years.
This infant was already the head of an independent group of conspirators which
had been formed in the highest class of the gymnasium, as it came out
afterwards to the surprise of every one.

I haven't mentioned Shatov. He was there at the farthest corner of the table,
his chair pushed back a little out of the row. He gazed at the ground, was
gloomily silent, refused tea and bread, and did not for one instant let his cap
go out of his hand, as though to show that he was not a visitor, but had come
on business, and when he liked would get up and go away. Kirillov was not far
from him. He, too, was very silent, but he did not look at the ground; on the
contrary, he scrutinised intently every speaker with his fixed, lustreless
eyes, and listened to everything without the slightest emotion or surprise.
Some of the visitors who had never seen him before stole thoughtful glances at
him. I can't say whether Madame Virginsky knew anything about the existence of
the quintet. I imagine she knew everything and from her husband. The
girl-student, of course, took no part in anything; but she had an anxiety of
her own: she intended to stay only a day or two and then to go on farther and
farther from one university town to another "to show active sympathy with the
sufferings of poor students and to rouse them to protest." She was taking with
her some hundreds of copies of a lithographed appeal, I believe of her own
composition. It is remarkable that the schoolboy conceived an almost murderous
hatred for her from the first moment, though he saw her for the first time in
his life; and she felt the same for him. The major was her uncle, and met her
to-day for the first time after ten years. When Stavrogin and Verhovensky came
in, her cheeks were as red as cranberries: she had just quarrelled with her
uncle over his views on the woman question.

