# PART II - CHAPTER I. NIGHT - V
[Metadata]: # {02.01.05}
[Descriptor]: # {02.01.05}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART II
CHAPTER I. NIGHT
V
# V
There everything was unlocked and all the doors stood open. The passage and the
first two rooms were dark, but there was a light shining in the last, in which
Kirillov lived and drank tea, and laughter and strange cries came from it.
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went towards the light, but stood still in the doorway
without going in. There was tea on the table. In the middle of the room stood
the old woman who was a relation of the landlord. She was bareheaded and was
dressed in a petticoat and a hare-skin jacket, and her stockingless feet were
thrust into slippers. In her arms she had an eighteen-months-old baby, with
nothing on but its little shirt; with bare legs, flushed cheeks, and ruffled
white hair. It had only just been taken out of the cradle. It seemed to have
just been crying; there were still tears in its eyes. But at that instant it
was stretching out its little arms, clapping its hands, and laughing with a sob
as little children do. Kirillov was bouncing a big red india-rubber ball on the
floor before it. The ball bounced up to the ceiling, and back to the floor, the
baby shrieked "Baw! baw!" Kirillov caught the "baw", and gave it to it. The
baby threw it itself with its awkward little hands, and Kirillov ran to pick it
up again.

At last the "baw" rolled under the cupboard. "Baw! baw!" cried the child.
Kirillov lay down on the floor, trying to reach the ball with his hand under
the cupboard. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went into the room. The baby caught sight
of him, nestled against the old woman, and went off into a prolonged infantile
wail. The woman immediately carried it out of the room.

"Stavrogin?" said Kirillov, beginning to get up from the floor with the ball in
his hand, and showing no surprise at the unexpected visit. "Will you have tea?"

He rose to his feet.

"I should be very glad of it, if it's hot," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch; "I'm
wet through."

"It's hot, nearly boiling in fact," Kirillov declared delighted. "Sit down.
You're muddy, but that's nothing; I'll mop up the floor later."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat down and emptied the cup he handed him almost at a
gulp.

"Some more?" asked Kirillov.

"No, thank you."

Kirillov, who had not sat down till then, seated himself facing him, and
inquired:

"Why have you come?"

"On business. Here, read this letter from Gaganov; do you remember, I talked to
you about him in Petersburg."

Kirillov took the letter, read it, laid it on the table and looked at him
expectantly.

"As you know, I met this Gaganov for the first time in my life a month ago, in
Petersburg," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch began to explain. "We came across each
other two or three times in company with other people. Without making my
acquaintance and without addressing me, he managed to be very insolent to me. I
told you so at the time; but now for something you don't know. As he was
leaving Petersburg before I did, he sent me a letter, not like this one, yet
impertinent in the highest degree, and what was queer about it was that it
contained no sort of explanation of why it was written. I answered him at once,
also by letter, and said, quite frankly, that he was probably angry with me on
account of the incident with his father four years ago in the club here, and
that I for my part was prepared to make him every possible apology, seeing that
my action was unintentional and was the result of illness. I begged him to
consider and accept my apologies. He went away without answering, and now here
I find him in a regular fury. Several things he has said about me in public
have been repeated to me, absolutely abusive, and making astounding charges
against me. Finally, to-day, I get this letter, a letter such as no one has
ever had before, I should think, containing such expressions as 'the punch you
got in your ugly face.' I came in the hope that you would not refuse to be my
second."

"You said no one has ever had such a letter," observed Kirillov, "they may be
sent in a rage. Such letters have been written more than once. Pushkin wrote to
Hekern. All right, I'll come. Tell me how."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch explained that he wanted it to be to-morrow, and that
he must begin by renewing his offers of apology, and even with the promise of
another letter of apology, but on condition that Gaganov, on his side, should
promise to send no more letters. The letter he had received he would regard as
unwritten.

"Too much concession; he won't agree," said Kirillov.

"I've come first of all to find out whether you would consent to be the bearer
of such terms."

"I'll take them. It's your affair. But he won't agree."

"I know he won't agree."

"He wants to fight. Say how you'll fight."

"The point is that I want the thing settled to-morrow. By nine o'clock in the
morning you must be at his house. He'll listen, and won't agree, but will put
you in communication with his second--let us say about eleven. You will arrange
things with him, and let us all be on the spot by one or two o'clock. Please
try to arrange that. The weapons, of course, will be pistols. And I
particularly beg you to arrange to fix the barriers at ten paces apart; then
you put each of us ten paces from the barrier, and at a given signal we
approach. Each must go right up to his barrier, but you may fire before, on the
way. I believe that's all."

"Ten paces between the barriers is very near," observed Kirillov.

"Well, twelve then, but not more. You understand that he wants to fight in
earnest. Do you know how to load a pistol?"

"I do. I've got pistols. I'll give my word that you've never fired them. His
second will give his word about his. There'll be two pairs of pistols, and
we'll toss up, his or ours?"

"Excellent."

"Would you like to look at the pistols?"

"Very well."

Kirillov squatted on his heels before the trunk in the corner, which he had
never yet unpacked, though things had been pulled out of it as required. He
pulled out from the bottom a palm-wood box lined with red velvet, and from it
took out a pair of smart and very expensive pistols.

"I've got everything, powder, bullets, cartridges. I've a revolver besides,
wait."

He stooped down to the trunk again and took out a six-chambered American
revolver.

"You've got weapons enough, and very good ones."

"Very, extremely."

Kirillov, who was poor, almost destitute, though he never noticed his poverty,
was evidently proud of showing precious weapons, which he had certainly
obtained with great sacrifice.

"You still have the same intentions?" Stavrogin asked after a moment's silence,
and with a certain wariness.

"Yes," answered Kirillov shortly, guessing at once from his voice what he was
asking about, and he began taking the weapons from the table.

"When?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch inquired still more cautiously, after a pause.

In the meantime Kirillov had put both the boxes back in his trunk, and sat down
in his place again.

"That doesn't depend on me, as you know--when they tell me," he muttered, as
though disliking the question; but at the same time with evident readiness to
answer any other question. He kept his black, lustreless eyes fixed continually
on Stavrogin with a calm but warm and kindly expression in them.

"I understand shooting oneself, of course," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch began
suddenly, frowning a little, after a dreamy silence that lasted three minutes.
"I sometimes have thought of it myself, and then there always came a new idea:
if one did something wicked, or, worse still, something shameful, that is,
disgraceful, only very shameful and... ridiculous, such as people would
remember for a thousand years and hold in scorn for a thousand years, and
suddenly the thought comes: 'one blow in the temple and there would be nothing
more.' One wouldn't care then for men and that they would hold one in scorn for
a thousand years, would one?"

"You call that a new idea?" said Kirillov, after a moment's thought.

"I... didn't call it so, but when I thought it I felt it as a new idea."

"You 'felt the idea'?" observed Kirillov. "That's good. There are lots of ideas
that are always there and yet suddenly become new. That's true. I see a great
deal now as though it were for the first time."

"Suppose you had lived in the moon," Stavrogin interrupted, not listening, but
pursuing his own thought, "and suppose there you had done all these nasty and
ridiculous things.... You know from here for certain that they will laugh at
you and hold you in scorn for a thousand years as long as the moon lasts. But
now you are here, and looking at the moon from here. You don't care here for
anything you've done there, and that the people there will hold you in scorn
for a thousand years, do you?"

"I don't know," answered Kirillov. "I've not been in the moon," he added,
without any irony, simply to state the fact.

"Whose baby was that just now?"

"The old woman's mother-in-law was here--no, daughter-in-law, it's all the
same. Three days. She's lying ill with the baby, it cries a lot at night, it's
the stomach. The mother sleeps, but the old woman picks it up; I play ball with
it. The ball's from Hamburg. I bought it in Hamburg to throw it and catch it,
it strengthens the spine. It's a girl."

"Are you fond of children?"

"I am," answered Kirillov, though rather indifferently.

"Then you're fond of life?"

"Yes, I'm fond of life! What of it?"

"Though you've made up your mind to shoot yourself."

"What of it? Why connect it? Life's one thing and that's another. Life exists,
but death doesn't at all."

"You've begun to believe in a future eternal life?"

"No, not in a future eternal life, but in eternal life here. There are moments,
you reach moments, and time suddenly stands still, and it will become eternal."

"You hope to reach such a moment?"

"Yes."

"That'll scarcely be possible in our time," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch responded
slowly and, as it were, dreamily; the two spoke without the slightest irony.
"In the Apocalypse the angel swears that there will be no more time."

"I know. That's very true; distinct and exact. When all mankind attains
happiness then there will be no more time, for there'll be no need of it, a
very true thought."

"Where will they put it?"

"Nowhere. Time's not an object but an idea. It will be extinguished in the
mind."

"The old commonplaces of philosophy, the same from the beginning of time,"
Stavrogin muttered with a kind of disdainful compassion.

"Always the same, always the same, from the beginning of time and never any
other," Kirillov said with sparkling eyes, as though there were almost a
triumph in that idea.

"You seem to be very happy, Kirillov."

"Yes, very happy," he answered, as though making the most ordinary reply.

"But you were distressed so lately, angry with Liputin."

"H'm... I'm not scolding now. I didn't know then that I was happy. Have you
seen a leaf, a leaf from a tree?"

"Yes."

"I saw a yellow one lately, a little green. It was decayed at the edges. It was
blown by the wind. When I was ten years old I used to shut my eyes in the
winter on purpose and fancy a green leaf, bright, with veins on it, and the sun
shining. I used to open my eyes and not believe them, because it was very nice,
and I used to shut them again."

"What's that? An allegory?"

"N-no... why? I'm not speaking of an allegory, but of a leaf, only a leaf. The
leaf is good. Everything's good."

"Everything?"

"Everything. Man is unhappy because he doesn't know he's happy. It's only that.
That's all, that's all! If anyone finds out he'll become happy at once, that
minute. That mother-in-law will die; but the baby will remain. It's all good. I
discovered it all of a sudden."

"And if anyone dies of hunger, and if anyone insults and outrages the little
girl, is that good?"

"Yes! And if anyone blows his brains out for the baby, that's good too. And if
anyone doesn't, that's good too. It's all good, all. It's good for all those
who know that it's all good. If they knew that it was good for them, it would
be good for them, but as long as they don't know it's good for them, it will be
bad for them. That's the whole idea, the whole of it."

"When did you find out you were so happy?"

"Last week, on Tuesday, no, Wednesday, for it was Wednesday by that time, in
the night."

"By what reasoning?"

"I don't remember; I was walking about the room; never mind. I stopped my
clock. It was thirty-seven minutes past two."

"As an emblem of the fact that there will be no more time?"

Kirillov was silent.

"They're bad because they don't know they're good. When they find out, they
won't outrage a little girl. They'll find out that they're good and they'll all
become good, every one of them."

"Here you've found it out, so have you become good then?"

"I am good."

"That I agree with, though," Stavrogin muttered, frowning.

"He who teaches that all are good will end the world."

"He who taught it was crucified."

"He will come, and his name will be the man-god."

"The god-man?"

"The man-god. That's the difference."

"Surely it wasn't you lighted the lamp under the ikon?"

"Yes, it was I lighted it."

"Did you do it believing?"

"The old woman likes to have the lamp and she hadn't time to do it to-day,"
muttered Kirillov.

"You don't say prayers yourself?"

"I pray to everything. You see the spider crawling on the wall, I look at it
and thank it for crawling."

His eyes glowed again. He kept looking straight at Stavrogin with firm and
unflinching expression. Stavrogin frowned and watched him disdainfully, but
there was no mockery in his eyes.

"I'll bet that when I come next time you'll be believing in God too," he said,
getting up and taking his hat.

"Why?" said Kirillov, getting up too.

"If you were to find out that you believe in God, then you'd believe in Him;
but since you don't know that you believe in Him, then you don't believe in
Him," laughed Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"That's not right," Kirillov pondered, "you've distorted the idea. It's a
flippant joke. Remember what you have meant in my life, Stavrogin."

"Good-bye, Kirillov."

"Come at night; when will you?"

"Why, haven't you forgotten about to-morrow?"

"Ach, I'd forgotten. Don't be uneasy. I won't oversleep. At nine o'clock. I
know how to wake up when I want to. I go to bed saying 'seven o'clock,' and I
wake up at seven o'clock, 'ten o'clock,' and I wake up at ten o'clock."

"You have remarkable powers," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, looking at his pale
face.

"I'll come and open the gate."

"Don't trouble, Shatov will open it for me."

"Ah, Shatov. Very well, good-bye."

