# PART I - CHAPTER V. THE SUBTLE SERPENT - V
[Metadata]: # {01.05.05}
[Descriptor]: # {01.05.05}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# V
[TreeTag]: # {01.05.05.01}
I will permit myself to halt here to sketch in a few hurried strokes this
person who had so suddenly arrived on the scene.

He was a young man of twenty-seven or thereabouts, a little above the medium
height, with rather long, lank, flaxen hair, and with faintly defined,
irregular moustache and beard. He was dressed neatly, and in the fashion,
though not like a dandy. At the first glance he looked round-shouldered and
awkward, but yet he was not round-shouldered, and his manner was easy. He
seemed a queer fish, and yet later on we all thought his manners good, and his
conversation always to the point.

No one would have said that he was ugly, and yet no one would have liked his
face. His head was elongated at the back, and looked flattened at the sides, so
that his face seemed pointed, his forehead was high and narrow, but his
features were small; his eyes were keen, his nose was small and sharp, his lips
were long and thin. The expression of his face suggested ill-health, but this
was misleading. He had a wrinkle on each cheek which gave him the look of a man
who had just recovered from a serious illness. Yet he was perfectly well and
strong, and had never been ill.

He walked and moved very hurriedly, yet never seemed in a hurry to be off. It
seemed as though nothing could disconcert him; in every circumstance and in
every sort of society he remained the same. He had a great deal of conceit, but
was utterly unaware of it himself.

He talked quickly, hurriedly, but at the same time with assurance, and was
never at a loss for a word. In spite of his hurried manner his ideas were in
perfect order, distinct and definite--and this was particularly striking. His
articulation was wonderfully clear. His words pattered out like smooth, big
grains, always well chosen, and at your service. At first this attracted one,
but afterwards it became repulsive, just because of this over-distinct
articulation, this string of ever-ready words.  One somehow began to imagine
that he must have a tongue of special shape, somehow exceptionally long and
thin, extremely red with a very sharp everlastingly active little tip.

Well, this was the young man who darted now into the drawing-room, and really,
I believe to this day, that he began to talk in the next room, and came in
speaking. He was standing before Varvara Petrovna in a trice.

"... Only fancy, Varvara Petrovna," he pattered on, "I came in expecting to
find he'd been here for the last quarter of an hour; he arrived an hour and a
half ago; we met at Kirillov's: he set off half an hour ago meaning to come
straight here, and told me to come here too, a quarter of an hour later...."

"But who? Who told you to come here?" Varvara Petrovna inquired.

"Why, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch! Surely this isn't the first you've heard of it!
But his luggage must have been here a long while, anyway. How is it you weren't
told? Then I'm the first to bring the news. One might send out to look for him;
he's sure to be here himself directly though. And I fancy, at the moment that
just fits in with some of his expectations, and is far as I can judge, at
least, some of his calculations."

At this point he turned his eyes about the room and fixed them with special
attention on the captain.

"Ach, Lizaveta Nikolaevna, how glad I am to meet you at the very first step,
delighted to shake hands with you." He flew up to Liza, who was smiling gaily,
to take her proffered hand, "and I observe that my honoured friend Praskovya
Ivanovna has not forgotten her 'professor,' and actually isn't cross with him,
as she always used to be in Switzerland. But how are your legs, here, Praskovya
Ivanovna, and were the Swiss doctors right when at the consultation they
prescribed your native air? What? Fomentations? That ought to do good. But how
sorry I was, Varvara Petrovna" (he turned rapidly to her) "that I didn't arrive
in time to meet you abroad, and offer my respects to you in person; I had so
much to tell you too. I did send word to my old man here, but I fancy that he
did as he always does..."

"Petrusha!" cried Stepan Trofimovitch, instantly roused from his stupefaction.
He clasped his hands and flew to his son. "_Pierre, mon enfant!_ Why, I didn't
know you!" He pressed him in his arms and the tears rolled down his cheeks.

"Come, be quiet, be quiet, no flourishes, that's enough, that's enough,
please," Petrusha muttered hurriedly, trying to extricate himself from his
embrace.

"I've always sinned against you, always!"

"Well, that's enough. We can talk of that later. I knew you'd carry on. Come,
be a little more sober, please."

"But it's ten years since I've seen you."

"The less reason for demonstrations."

_"Mon enfant!..."_

"Come, I believe in your affection, I believe in it, take your arms away. You
see, you're disturbing other people.... Ah, here's Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch;
keep quiet, please."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch was already in the room; he came in very quietly and
stood still for an instant in the doorway, quietly scrutinising the company.

I was struck by the first sight of him just as I had been four years before,
when I saw him for the first time. I had not forgotten him in the least. But I
think there are some countenances which always seem to exhibit something new
which one has not noticed before, every time one meets them, though one may
have seen them a hundred times already. Apparently he was exactly the same as
he had been four years before. He was as elegant, as dignified, he moved with
the same air of consequence as before, indeed he looked almost as young. His
faint smile had just the same official graciousness and complacency. His eyes
had the same stern, thoughtful and, as it were, preoccupied look. In fact, it
seemed as though we had only parted the day before. But one thing struck me. In
old days, though he had been considered handsome, his face was "like a mask,"
as some of our sharp-tongued ladies had expressed it. Now--now, I don't know
why he impressed me at once as absolutely, incontestably beautiful, so that no
one could have said that his face was like a mask. Wasn't it perhaps that he
was a little paler and seemed rather thinner than before? Or was there,
perhaps, the light of some new idea in his eyes?

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch!" cried Varvara Petrovna, drawing herself up but not
rising from her chair. "Stop a minute!" She checked his advance with a
peremptory gesture.

But to explain the awful question which immediately followed that gesture and
exclamation--a question which I should have imagined to be impossible even in
Varvara Petrovna, I must ask the reader to remember what that lady's
temperament had always been, and the extraordinary impulsiveness she showed at
some critical moments. I beg him to consider also, that in spite of the
exceptional strength of her spirit and the very considerable amount of common
sense and practical, so to say business, tact she possessed, there were moments
in her life in which she abandoned herself altogether, entirely and, if it's
permissible to say so, absolutely without restraint. I beg him to take into
consideration also that the present moment might really be for her one of those
in which all the essence of life, of all the past and all the present, perhaps,
too, all the future, is concentrated, as it were, focused. I must briefly
recall, too, the anonymous letter of which she had spoken to Praskovya Ivanovna
with so much irritation, though I think she said nothing of the latter part of
it. Yet it perhaps contained the explanation of the possibility of the terrible
question with which she suddenly addressed her son.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch," she repeated, rapping out her words in a resolute
voice in which there was a ring of menacing challenge, "I beg you to tell me at
once, without moving from that place; is it true that this unhappy
cripple--here she is, here, look at her--is it true that she is... your lawful
wife?"

I remember that moment only too well; he did not wink an eyelash but looked
intently at his mother. Not the faintest change in his face followed. At last
he smiled, a sort of indulgent smile, and without answering a word went quietly
up to his mother, took her hand, raised it respectfully to his lips and kissed
it. And so great was his invariable and irresistible ascendancy over his mother
that even now she could not bring herself to pull away her hand. She only gazed
at him, her whole figure one concentrated question, seeming to betray that she
could not bear the suspense another moment.

But he was still silent. When he had kissed her hand, he scanned the whole room
once more, and moving, as before, without haste went towards Marya Timofyevna.
It is very difficult to describe people's countenances at certain moments. I
remember, for instance, that Marya Timofyevna, breathless with fear, rose to
her feet to meet him and clasped her hands before her, as though beseeching
him. And at the same time I remember the frantic ecstasy which almost distorted
her face--an ecstasy almost too great for any human being to bear. Perhaps both
were there, both the terror and the ecstasy. But I remember moving quickly
towards her (I was standing not far off), for I fancied she was going to faint.

"You should not be here," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch said to her in a caressing
and melodious voice; and there was the light of an extraordinary tenderness in
his eyes. He stood before her in the most respectful attitude, and every
gesture showed sincere respect for her. The poor girl faltered impulsively in a
half-whisper.

"But may I... kneel down... to you now?"

"No, you can't do that."

He smiled at her magnificently, so that she too laughed joyfully at once. In
the same melodious voice, coaxing her tenderly as though she were a child, he
went on gravely.

"Only think that you are a girl, and that though I'm your devoted friend I'm an
outsider, not your husband, nor your father, nor your betrothed. Give me your
arm and let us go; I will take you to the carriage, and if you will let me I
will see you all the way home."

She listened, and bent her head as though meditating.

"Let's go," she said with a sigh, giving him her hand.

But at that point a slight mischance befell her. She must have turned
carelessly, resting on her lame leg, which was shorter than the other. She fell
sideways into the chair, and if the chair had not been there would have fallen
on to the floor. He instantly seized and supported her, and holding her arm
firmly in his, led her carefully and sympathetically to the door. She was
evidently mortified at having fallen; she was overwhelmed, blushed, and was
terribly abashed. Looking dumbly on the ground, limping painfully, she hobbled
after him, almost hanging on his arm. So they went out. Liza, I saw, suddenly
jumped up from her chair for some reason as they were going out, and she
followed them with intent eyes till they reached the door. Then she sat down
again in silence, but there was a nervous twitching in her face, as though she
had touched a viper.

While this scene was taking place between Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch and Marya
Timofyevna every one was speechless with amazement; one could have heard a fly;
but as soon as they had gone out, every one began suddenly talking.

