# PART I - CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING. - I
[Metadata]: # {01.02.01}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING.
I
# I
THERE WAS ANOTHER being in the world to whom Varvara Petrovna was as much
attached as she was to Stepan Trofimovitch, her only son, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch Stavrogin. It was to undertake his education that Stepan
Trofimovitch had been engaged. The boy was at that time eight years old, and
his frivolous father, General Stavrogin, was already living apart from Varvara
Petrovna, so that the child grew up entirely in his mother's care. To do Stepan
Trofimovitch justice, he knew how to win his pupil's heart. The whole secret of
this lay in the fact that he was a child himself. I was not there in those
days, and he continually felt the want of a real friend. He did not hesitate to
make a friend of this little creature as soon as he had grown a little older.
It somehow came to pass quite naturally that there seemed to be no discrepancy
of age between them. More than once he awaked his ten- or eleven-year-old
friend at night, simply to pour out his wounded feelings and weep before him,
or to tell him some family secret, without realising that this was an
outrageous proceeding. They threw themselves into each other's arms and wept.
The boy knew that his mother loved him very much, but I doubt whether he cared
much for her. She talked little to him and did not often interfere with him,
but he was always morbidly conscious of her intent, searching eyes fixed upon
him. Yet the mother confided his whole instruction and moral education to
Stepan Trofimovitch. At that time her faith in him was unshaken. One can't help
believing that the tutor had rather a bad influence on his pupil's nerves. When
at sixteen he was taken to a lyceum he was fragile-looking and pale, strangely
quiet and dreamy. (Later on he was distinguished by great physical strength.)
One must assume too that the friends went on weeping at night, throwing
themselves in each other's arms, though their tears were not always due to
domestic difficulties. Stepan Trofimovitch succeeded in reaching the deepest
chords in his pupil's heart, and had aroused in him a vague sensation of that
eternal, sacred yearning which some elect souls can never give up for cheap
gratification when once they have tasted and known it. (There are some
connoisseurs who prize this yearning more than the most complete satisfaction
of it, if such were possible.) But in any case it was just as well that the
pupil and the preceptor were, though none too soon, parted.

For the first two years the lad used to come home from the lyceum for the
holidays. While Varvara Petrovna and Stepan Trofimovitch were staying in
Petersburg he was sometimes present at the literary evenings at his mother's,
he listened and looked on. He spoke little, and was quiet and shy as before.
His manner to Stepan Trofimovitch was as affectionately attentive as ever, but
there was a shade of reserve in it. He unmistakably avoided distressing, lofty
subjects or reminiscences of the past. By his mother's wish he entered the army
on completing the school course, and soon received a commission in one of the
most brilliant regiments of the Horse Guards. He did not come to show himself
to his mother in his uniform, and his letters from Petersburg began to be
infrequent. Varvara Petrovna sent him money without stint, though after the
emancipation the revenue from her estate was so diminished that at first her
income was less than half what it had been before. She had, however, a
considerable sum laid by through years of economy. She took great interest in
her son's success in the highest Petersburg society. Where she had failed, the
wealthy young officer with expectations succeeded. He renewed acquaintances
which she had hardly dared to dream of, and was welcomed everywhere with
pleasure. But very soon rather strange rumours reached Varvara Petrovna. The
young man had suddenly taken to riotous living with a sort of frenzy. Not that
he gambled or drank too much; there was only talk of savage recklessness, of
running over people in the street with his horses, of brutal conduct to a lady
of good society with whom he had a liaison and whom he afterwards publicly
insulted. There was a callous nastiness about this affair. It was added, too,
that he had developed into a regular bully, insulting people for the mere
pleasure of insulting them. Varvara Petrovna was greatly agitated and
distressed. Stepan Trofimovitch assured her that this was only the first
riotous effervescence of a too richly endowed nature, that the storm would
subside and that this was only like the youth of Prince Harry, who caroused
with Falstaff, Poins, and Mrs. Quickly, as described by Shakespeare.

This time Varvara Petrovna did not cry out, "Nonsense, nonsense!" as she was
very apt to do in later years in response to Stepan Trofimovitch. On the
contrary she listened very eagerly, asked him to explain this theory more
exactly, took up Shakespeare herself and with great attention read the immortal
chronicle. But it did not comfort her, and indeed she did not find the
resemblance very striking. With feverish impatience she awaited answers to some
of her letters. She had not long to wait for them. The fatal news soon reached
her that "Prince Harry" had been involved in two duels almost at once, was
entirely to blame for both of them, had killed one of his adversaries on the
spot and had maimed the other and was awaiting his trial in consequence. The
case ended in his being degraded to the ranks, deprived of the rights of a
nobleman, and transferred to an infantry line regiment, and he only escaped
worse punishment by special favour.

In 1863 he somehow succeeded in distinguishing himself; he received a cross,
was promoted to be a non-commissioned officer, and rose rapidly to the rank of
an officer. During this period Varvara Petrovna despatched perhaps hundreds of
letters to the capital, full of prayers and supplications. She even stooped to
some humiliation in this extremity. After his promotion the young man suddenly
resigned his commission, but he did not come back to Skvoreshniki again, and
gave up writing to his mother altogether. They learned by roundabout means that
he was back in Petersburg, but that he was not to be met in the same society as
before; he seemed to be in hiding. They found out that he was living in strange
company, associating with the dregs of the population of Petersburg, with
slip-shod government clerks, discharged military men, beggars of the higher
class, and drunkards of all sorts--that he visited their filthy families, spent
days and nights in dark slums and all sorts of low haunts, that he had sunk
very low, that he was in rags, and that apparently he liked it. He did not ask
his mother for money, he had his own little estate--once the property of his
father, General Stavrogin, which yielded at least some revenue, and which, it
was reported, he had let to a German from Saxony. At last his mother besought
him to come to her, and "Prince Harry" made his appearance in our town. I had
never set eyes on him before, but now I got a very distinct impression of him.
He was a very handsome young man of five-and-twenty, and I must own I was
impressed by him. I had expected to see a dirty ragamuffin, sodden with drink
and debauchery. He was on the contrary, the most elegant gentleman I had ever
met, extremely well dressed, with an air and manner only to be found in a man
accustomed to culture and refinement. I was not the only person surprised. It
was a surprise to all the townspeople to whom, of course, young Stavrogin's
whole biography was well known in its minutest details, though one could not
imagine how they had got hold of them, and, what was still more surprising,
half of their stories about him turned out to be true.

All our ladies were wild over the new visitor. They were sharply divided into
two parties, one of which adored him while the other half regarded him with a
hatred that was almost blood-thirsty: but both were crazy about him. Some of
them were particularly fascinated by the idea that he had perhaps a fateful
secret hidden in his soul; others were positively delighted at the fact that he
was a murderer. It appeared too that he had had a very good education and was
indeed a man of considerable culture. No great acquirements were needed, of
course, to astonish us. But he could judge also of very interesting everyday
affairs, and, what was of the utmost value, he judged of them with remarkable
good sense. I must mention as a peculiar fact that almost from the first day we
all of us thought him a very sensible fellow. He was not very talkative, he was
elegant without exaggeration, surprisingly modest, and at the same time bold
and self-reliant, as none of us were. Our dandies gazed at him with envy, and
were completely eclipsed by him. His face, too, impressed me. His hair was of a
peculiarly intense black, his light-coloured eyes were peculiarly light and
calm, his complexion was peculiarly soft and white, the red in his cheeks was
too bright and clear, his teeth were like pearls, and his lips like coral--one
would have thought that he must be a paragon of beauty, yet at the same time
there seemed something repellent about him. It was said that his face suggested
a mask; so much was said though, among other things they talked of his
extraordinary physical strength. He was rather tall. Varvara Petrovna looked at
him with pride, yet with continual uneasiness. He spent about six months among
us--listless, quiet, rather morose. He made his appearance in society, and with
unfailing propriety performed all the duties demanded by our provincial
etiquette. He was related, on his father's side, to the governor, and was
received by the latter as a near kinsman. But a few months passed and the wild
beast showed his claws.

I may observe by the way, in parenthesis, that Ivan Ossipovitch, our dear mild
governor, was rather like an old woman, though he was of good family and highly
connected--which explains the fact that he remained so long among us, though he
steadily avoided all the duties of his office. From his munificence and
hospitality he ought rather to have been a marshal of nobility of the good old
days than a governor in such busy times as ours. It was always said in the town
that it was not he, but Varvara Petrovna who governed the province. Of course
this was said sarcastically; however, it was certainly a falsehood. And,
indeed, much wit was wasted on the subject among us. On the contrary, in later
years, Varvara Petrovna purposely and consciously withdrew from anything like a
position of authority, and, in spite of the extraordinary respect in which she
was held by the whole province, voluntarily confined her influence within
strict limits set up by herself. Instead of these higher responsibilities she
suddenly took up the management of her estate, and, within two or three years,
raised the revenue from it almost to what it had yielded in the past. Giving up
her former romantic impulses (trips to Petersburg, plans for founding a
magazine, and so on) she began to be careful and to save money. She kept even
Stepan Trofimovitch at a distance, allowing him to take lodgings in another
house (a change for which he had long been worrying her under various
pretexts). Little by little Stepan Trofimovitch began to call her a prosaic
woman, or more jestingly, "My prosaic friend." I need hardly say he only
ventured on such jests in an extremely respectful form, and on rare, and
carefully chosen, occasions.

All of us in her intimate circle felt--Stepan Trofimovitch more acutely than
any of us--that her son had come to her almost, as it were, as a new hope, and
even as a sort of new aspiration. Her passion for her son dated from the time
of his successes in Petersburg society, and grew more intense from the moment
that he was degraded in the army. Yet she was evidently afraid of him, and
seemed like a slave in his presence. It could be seen that she was afraid of
something vague and mysterious which she could not have put into words, and she
often stole searching glances at "Nicolas," scrutinising him reflectively...
and behold--the wild beast suddenly showed his claws.

