# PART III - CHAPTER I. THE FETE--FIRST PART - II
[Metadata]: # {03.01.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.01.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {03.01.02.01}
The programme of the fête was divided into two parts: the literary matinée from
midday till four o'clock, and afterwards a ball from ten o'clock onwards
through the night. But in this very programme there lay concealed germs of
disorder. In the first place, from the very beginning a rumour had gained
ground among the public concerning a luncheon immediately after the literary
matinée, or even while it was going on, during an interval arranged expressly
for it--a free luncheon, of course, which would form part of the programme and
be accompanied by champagne. The immense price of the tickets (three roubles)
tended to confirm this rumour. "As though one would subscribe for nothing? The
fête is arranged for twenty-four hours, so food must be provided. People will
get hungry." This was how people reasoned in the town. I must admit that Yulia
Mihailovna did much to confirm this disastrous rumour by her own heedlessness.
A month earlier, under the first spell of the great project, she would babble
about it to anyone she met; and even sent a paragraph to one of the Petersburg
papers about the toasts and speeches arranged for her fête. What fascinated her
most at that time was the idea of these toasts; she wanted to propose them
herself and was continually composing them in anticipation. They were to make
clear what was their banner (what was it? I don't mind betting that the poor
dear composed nothing after all), they were to get into the Petersburg and
Moscow papers, to touch and fascinate the higher powers and then to spread the
idea over all the provinces of Russia, rousing people to wonder and imitation.

But for toasts, champagne was essential, and as champagne can't be drunk on an
empty stomach, it followed that a lunch was essential too. Afterwards, when by
her efforts a committee had been formed and had attacked the subject more
seriously, it was proved clearly to her at once that if they were going to
dream of banquets there would be very little left for the governesses, however
well people subscribed. There were two ways out of the difficulty: either
Belshazzar's feast with toasts and speeches, and ninety roubles for the
governesses, or a considerable sum of money with the fête only as a matter of
form to raise it. The committee, however, only wanted to scare her, and had of
course worked out a third course of action, which was reasonable and combined
the advantages of both, that is, a very decent fête in every respect only
without champagne, and so yielding a very respectable sum, much more than
ninety roubles. But Yulia Mihailovna would not agree to it: her proud spirit
revolted from paltry compromise. She decided at once that if the original idea
could not be carried out they should rush to the opposite extreme, that is,
raise an enormous subscription that would be the envy of other provinces. "The
public must understand," she said at the end of her flaming speech to the
committee, "that the attainment of an object of universal human interest is
infinitely loftier than the corporeal enjoyments of the passing moment, that
the fête in its essence is only the proclamation of a great idea, and so we
ought to be content with the most frugal German ball simply as a symbol, that
is, if we can't dispense with this detestable ball altogether," so great was
the aversion she suddenly conceived for it. But she was pacified at last. It
was then that "the literary quadrille" and the other æsthetic items were
invented and proposed as substitutes for the corporeal enjoyments. It was then
that Karmazinov finally consented to read _Merci_ (until then he had only
tantalised them by his hesitation) and so eradicate the very idea of victuals
from the minds of our incontinent public. So the ball was once more to be a
magnificent function, though in a different style. And not to be too ethereal
it was decided that tea with lemon and round biscuits should be served at the
beginning of the ball, and later on "orchade" and lemonade and at the end even
ices--but nothing else. For those who always and everywhere are hungry and,
still more, thirsty, they might open a buffet in the farthest of the suite of
rooms and put it in charge of Prohorovitch, the head cook of the club, who
would, subject to the strict supervision of the committee, serve whatever was
wanted, at a fixed charge, and a notice should be put up on the door of the
hall that refreshments were extra. But on the morning they decided not to open
the buffet at all for fear of disturbing the reading, though the buffet would
have been five rooms off the White Hall in which Karmazinov had consented to
read _Merci._

It is remarkable that the committee, and even the most practical people in it,
attached enormous consequence to this reading. As for people of poetical
tendencies, the marshal's wife, for instance, informed Karmazinov that after
the reading she would immediately order a marble slab to be put up in the wall
of the White Hall with an inscription in gold letters, that on such a day and
year, here, in this place, the great writer of Russia and of Europe had read
_Merci_ on laying aside his pen, and so had for the first time taken leave of
the Russian public represented by the leading citizens of our town, and that
this inscription would be read by all at the ball, that is, only five hours
after _Merci_ had been read. I know for a fact that Karmazinov it was who
insisted that there should be no buffet in the morning on any account, while he
was reading, in spite of some protests from members of the committee that this
was rather opposed to our way of doing things.

This was the position of affairs, while in the town people were still reckoning
on a Belshazzar feast, that is, on refreshments provided by the committee; they
believed in this to the last hour. Even the young ladies were dreaming of
masses of sweets and preserves, and something more beyond their imagination.
Every one knew that the subscriptions had reached a huge sum, that all the town
was struggling to go, that people were driving in from the surrounding
districts, and that there were not tickets enough. It was known, too, that
there had been some large subscriptions apart from the price paid for tickets:
Varvara Petrovna, for instance, had paid three hundred roubles for her ticket
and had given almost all the flowers from her conservatory to decorate the
room. The marshal's wife, who was a member of the committee, provided the house
and the lighting; the club furnished the music, the attendants, and gave up
Prohorovitch for the whole day. There were other contributions as well, though
lesser ones, so much so indeed that the idea was mooted of cutting down the
price of tickets from three roubles to two. Indeed, the committee were afraid
at first that three roubles would be too much for young ladies to pay, and
suggested that they might have family tickets, so that every family should pay
for one daughter only, while the other young ladies of the family, even if
there were a dozen specimens, should be admitted free. But all their
apprehensions turned out to be groundless: it was just the young ladies who did
come. Even the poorest clerks brought their girls, and it was quite evident
that if they had had no girls it would never have occurred to them to subscribe
for tickets. One insignificant little secretary brought all his seven
daughters, to say nothing of his wife and a niece into the bargain, and every
one of these persons held in her hand an entrance ticket that cost three
roubles.

It may be imagined what an upheaval it made in the town! One has only to
remember that as the fête was divided into two parts every lady needed two
costumes for the occasion--a morning one for the matinée and a ball dress for
the evening. Many middle-class people, as it appeared afterwards, had pawned
everything they had for that day, even the family linen, even the sheets, and
possibly the mattresses, to the Jews, who had been settling in our town in
great numbers during the previous two years and who became more and more
numerous as time went on. Almost all the officials had asked for their salary
in advance, and some of the landowners sold beasts they could ill spare, and
all simply to bring their ladies got up as marchionesses, and to be as good as
anybody. The magnificence of dresses on this occasion was something unheard of
in our neighbourhood. For a fortnight beforehand the town was overflowing with
funny stories which were all brought by our wits to Yulia Mihailovna's court.
Caricatures were passed from hand to hand. I have seen some drawings of the
sort myself, in Yulia Mihailovna's album. All this reached the ears of the
families who were the source of the jokes; I believe this was the cause of the
general hatred of Yulia Mihailovna which had grown so strong in the town.
People swear and gnash their teeth when they think of it now. But it was
evident, even at the time, that if the committee were to displease them in
anything, or if anything went wrong at the ball, the outburst of indignation
would be something surprising. That's why every one was secretly expecting a
scandal; and if it was so confidently expected, how could it fail to come to
pass?

The orchestra struck up punctually at midday. Being one of the stewards, that
is, one of the twelve "young men with a rosette," I saw with my own eyes how
this day of ignominious memory began. It began with an enormous crush at the
doors. How was it that everything, including the police, went wrong that day? I
don't blame the genuine public: the fathers of families did not crowd, nor did
they push against anyone, in spite of their position. On the contrary, I am
told that they were disconcerted even in the street, at the sight of the crowd
shoving in a way unheard of in our town, besieging the entry and taking it by
assault, instead of simply going in. Meanwhile the carriages kept driving up,
and at last blocked the street. Now, at the time I write, I have good grounds
for affirming that some of the lowest rabble of our town were brought in
without tickets by Lyamshin and Liputin, possibly, too, by other people who
were stewards like me. Anyway, some complete strangers, who had come from the
surrounding districts and elsewhere, were present. As soon as these savages
entered the hall they began asking where the buffet was, as though they had
been put up to it beforehand, and learning that there was no buffet they began
swearing with brutal directness, and an unprecedented insolence; some of them,
it is true, were drunk when they came. Some of them were dazed like savages at
the splendour of the hall, as they had never seen anything like it, and
subsided for a minute gazing at it open-mouthed. This great White Hall really
was magnificent, though the building was falling into decay: it was of immense
size, with two rows of windows, with an old-fashioned ceiling covered with gilt
carving, with a gallery with mirrors on the walls, red and white draperies,
marble statues (nondescript but still statues) with heavy old furniture of the
Napoleonic period, white and gold, upholstered in red velvet. At the moment I
am describing, a high platform had been put up for the literary gentlemen who
were to read, and the whole hall was filled with chairs like the parterre of a
theatre with wide aisles for the audience.

But after the first moments of surprise the most senseless questions and
protests followed. "Perhaps we don't care for a reading.... We've paid our
money.... The audience has been impudently swindled.... This is our
entertainment, not the Lembkes!" They seemed, in fact, to have been let in for
this purpose. I remember specially an encounter in which the princeling with
the stand-up collar and the face of a Dutch doll, whom I had met the morning
before at Yulia Mihailovna's, distinguished himself. He had, at her urgent
request, consented to pin a rosette on his left shoulder and to become one of
our stewards. It turned out that this dumb wax figure could act after a fashion
of his own, if he could not talk. When a colossal pockmarked captain, supported
by a herd of rabble following at his heels, pestered him by asking "which way
to the buffet?" he made a sign to a police sergeant. His hint was promptly
acted upon, and in spite of the drunken captain's abuse he was dragged out of
the hall. Meantime the genuine public began to make its appearance, and
stretched in three long files between the chairs. The disorderly elements began
to subside, but the public, even the most "respectable" among them, had a
dissatisfied and perplexed air; some of the ladies looked positively scared.

At last all were seated; the music ceased. People began blowing their noses and
looking about them. They waited with too solemn an air--which is always a bad
sign. But nothing was to be seen yet of the Lembkes. Silks, velvets, diamonds
glowed and sparkled on every side; whiffs of fragrance filled the air. The men
were wearing all their decorations, and the old men were even in uniform. At
last the marshal's wife came in with Liza. Liza had never been so dazzlingly
charming or so splendidly dressed as that morning. Her hair was done up in
curls, her eyes sparkled, a smile beamed on her face. She made an unmistakable
sensation: people scrutinised her and whispered about her. They said that she
was looking for Stavrogin, but neither Stavrogin nor Varvara Petrovna were
there. At the time I did not understand the expression of her face: why was
there so much happiness, such joy, such energy and strength in that face? I
remembered what had happened the day before and could not make it out.

But still the Lembkes did not come. This was distinctly a blunder. I learned
that Yulia Mihailovna waited till the last minute for Pyotr Stepanovitch,
without whom she could not stir a step, though she never admitted it to
herself. I must mention, in parenthesis, that on the previous day Pyotr
Stepanovitch had at the last meeting of the committee declined to wear the
rosette of a steward, which had disappointed her dreadfully, even to the point
of tears. To her surprise and, later on, her extreme discomfiture (to
anticipate things) he vanished for the whole morning and did not make his
appearance at the literary matinée at all, so that no one met him till evening.
At last the audience began to manifest unmistakable signs of impatience. No one
appeared on the platform either. The back rows began applauding, as in a
theatre. The elderly gentlemen and the ladies frowned. "The Lembkes are really
giving themselves unbearable airs." Even among the better part of the audience
an absurd whisper began to gain ground that perhaps there would not be a fête
at all, that Lembke perhaps was really unwell, and so on and so on. But, thank
God, the Lembkes at last appeared, she was leaning on his arm; I must confess I
was in great apprehension myself about their appearance. But the legends were
disproved, and the truth was triumphant. The audience seemed relieved. Lembke
himself seemed perfectly well. Every one, I remember, was of that opinion, for
it can be imagined how many eyes were turned on him. I may mention, as
characteristic of our society, that there were very few of the better-class
people who saw reason to suppose that there was anything wrong with him; his
conduct seemed to them perfectly normal, and so much so that the action he had
taken in the square the morning before was accepted and approved.

"That's how it should have been from the first," the higher officials declared.
"If a man begins as a philanthropist he has to come to the same thing in the
end, though he does not see that it was necessary from the point of view of
philanthropy itself"--that, at least, was the opinion at the club. They only
blamed him for having lost his temper. "It ought to have been done more coolly,
but there, he is a new man," said the authorities.

All eyes turned with equal eagerness to Yulia Mihailovna. Of course no one has
the right to expect from me an exact account in regard to one point: that is a
mysterious, a feminine question. But I only know one thing: on the evening of
the previous day she had gone into Andrey Antonovitch's study and was there
with him till long after midnight. Andrey Antonovitch was comforted and
forgiven. The husband and wife came to a complete understanding, everything was
forgotten, and when at the end of the interview Lembke went down on his knees,
recalling with horror the final incident of the previous night, the exquisite
hand, and after it the lips of his wife, checked the fervent flow of penitent
phrases of the chivalrously delicate gentleman who was limp with emotion. Every
one could see the happiness in her face. She walked in with an open-hearted
air, wearing a magnificent dress. She seemed to be at the very pinnacle of her
heart's desires, the fête--the goal and crown of her diplomacy--was an
accomplished fact. As they walked to their seats in front of the platform, the
Lembkes bowed in all directions and responded to greetings. They were at once
surrounded. The marshal's wife got up to meet them.

But at that point a horrid misunderstanding occurred; the orchestra, apropos of
nothing, struck up a flourish, not a triumphal march of any kind, but a simple
flourish such as was played at the club when some one's health was drunk at an
official dinner. I know now that Lyamshin, in his capacity of steward, had
arranged this, as though in honour of the Lembkes' entrance. Of course he could
always excuse it as a blunder or excessive zeal.... Alas! I did not know at the
time that they no longer cared even to find excuses, and that all such
considerations were from that day a thing of the past. But the flourish was not
the end of it: in the midst of the vexatious astonishment and the smiles of the
audience there was a sudden "hurrah" from the end of the hall and from the
gallery also, apparently in Lembke's honour. The hurrahs were few, but I must
confess they lasted for some time. Yulia Mihailovna flushed, her eyes flashed.
Lembke stood still at his chair, and turning towards the voices sternly and
majestically scanned the audience.... They hastened to make him sit down. I
noticed with dismay the same dangerous smile on his face as he had worn the
morning before, in his wife's drawing-room, when he stared at Stepan
Trofimovitch before going up to him. It seemed to me that now, too, there was
an ominous, and, worst of all, a rather comic expression on his countenance,
the expression of a man resigned to sacrifice himself to satisfy his wife's
lofty aims.... Yulia Mihailovna beckoned to me hurriedly, and whispered to me
to run to Karmazinov and entreat him to begin. And no sooner had I turned away
than another disgraceful incident, much more unpleasant than the first, took
place.

On the platform, the empty platform, on which till that moment all eyes and all
expectations were fastened, and where nothing was to be seen but a small table,
a chair in front of it, and on the table a glass of water on a silver
salver--on the empty platform there suddenly appeared the colossal figure of
Captain Lebyadkin wearing a dress-coat and a white tie. I was so astounded I
could not believe my eyes. The captain seemed confused and remained standing at
the back of the platform. Suddenly there was a shout in the audience,
"Lebyadkin! You?" The captain's stupid red face (he was hopelessly drunk)
expanded in a broad vacant grin at this greeting. He raised his hand, rubbed
his forehead with it, shook his shaggy head and, as though making up his mind
to go through with it, took two steps forward and suddenly went off into a
series of prolonged, blissful, gurgling, but not loud guffaws, which made him
screw up his eyes and set all his bulky person heaving. This spectacle set
almost half the audience laughing, twenty people applauded. The serious part of
the audience looked at one another gloomily; it all lasted only half a minute,
however. Liputin, wearing his steward's rosette, ran on to the platform with
two servants; they carefully took the captain by both arms, while Liputin
whispered something to him. The captain scowled, muttered "Ah, well, if that's
it!" waved his hand, turned his huge back to the public and vanished with his
escort. But a minute later Liputin skipped on to the platform again. He was
wearing the sweetest of his invariable smiles, which usually suggested vinegar
and sugar, and carried in his hands a sheet of note-paper. With tiny but rapid
steps he came forward to the edge of the platform.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, addressing the public, "through our
inadvertency there has arisen a comical misunderstanding which has been
removed; but I've hopefully undertaken to do something at the earnest and most
respectful request of one of our local poets. Deeply touched by the humane and
lofty object... in spite of his appearance... the object which has brought us
all together... to wipe away the tears of the poor but well-educated girls of
our province... this gentleman, I mean this local poet... although desirous of
preserving his incognito, would gladly have heard his poem read at the
beginning of the ball... that is, I mean, of the matinée. Though this poem is
not in the programme... for it has only been received half an hour ago... yet
it has seemed to _us_"--(Us? Whom did he mean by us? I report his confused and
incoherent speech word for word)--"that through its remarkable naïveté of
feeling, together with its equally remarkable gaiety, the poem might well be
read, that is, not as something serious, but as something appropriate to the
occasion, that is to the idea... especially as some lines... And I wanted to
ask the kind permission of the audience."

"Read it!" boomed a voice at the back of the hall.

"Then I am to read it?"

"Read it, read it!" cried many voices.

"With the permission of the audience I will read it," Liputin minced again,
still with the same sugary smile. He still seemed to hesitate, and I even
thought that he was rather excited. These people are sometimes nervous in spite
of their impudence. A divinity student would have carried it through without
winking, but Liputin did, after all, belong to the last generation.

"I must say, that is, I have the honour to say by way of preface, that it is
not precisely an ode such as used to be written for fêtes, but is rather, so to
say, a jest, but full of undoubted feeling, together with playful humour, and,
so to say, the most realistic truthfulness."

"Read it, read it!"

He unfolded the paper. No one of course was in time to stop him. Besides, he
was wearing his steward's badge. In a ringing voice he declaimed:

"To the local governesses of the Fatherland from the poet at the fête:

"Governesses all, good morrow,      Triumph on this festive day. Retrograde or
vowed George-Sander--      Never mind, just frisk away!"

"But that's Lebyadkin's! Lebyadkin's!" cried several voices. There was laughter
and even applause, though not from very many.

"Teaching French to wet-nosed children,      You are glad enough to think You
can catch a worn-out sexton--      Even he is worth a wink!"

"Hurrah! hurrah!"

"But in these great days of progress,      Ladies, to your sorrow know, You
can't even catch a sexton,      If you have not got a 'dot'."

"To be sure, to be sure, that's realism. You can't hook a husband without a
'dot'!"

"But, henceforth, since through our feasting      Capital has flowed from all,
And we send you forth to conquest      Dancing, dowried from this hall--
Retrograde or vowed George-Sander,      Never mind, rejoice you may, You're a
governess with a dowry,      Spit on all and frisk away!"

I must confess I could not believe my ears. The insolence of it was so
unmistakable that there was no possibility of excusing Liputin on the ground of
stupidity. Besides, Liputin was by no means stupid. The intention was obvious,
to me, anyway; they seemed in a hurry to create disorder. Some lines in these
idiotic verses, for instance the last, were such that no stupidity could have
let them pass. Liputin himself seemed to feel that he had undertaken too much;
when he had achieved his exploit he was so overcome by his own impudence that
he did not even leave the platform but remained standing, as though there were
something more he wanted to say. He had probably imagined that it would somehow
produce a different effect; but even the group of ruffians who had applauded
during the reading suddenly sank into silence, as though they, too, were
overcome. What was silliest of all, many of them took the whole episode
seriously, that is, did not regard the verses as a lampoon but actually thought
it realistic and true as regards the governesses--a poem with a tendency, in
fact. But the excessive freedom of the verses struck even them at last; as for
the general public they were not only scandalised but obviously offended. I am
sure I am not mistaken as to the impression. Yulia Mihailovna said afterwards
that in another moment she would have fallen into a swoon. One of the most
respectable old gentlemen helped his old wife on to her feet, and they walked
out of the hall accompanied by the agitated glances of the audience. Who knows,
the example might have infected others if Karmazinov himself, wearing a
dress-coat and a white tie and carrying a manuscript, in his hand, had not
appeared on the platform at that moment. Yulia Mihailovna turned an ecstatic
gaze at him as on her deliverer.... But I was by that time behind the scenes. I
was in quest of Liputin.

"You did that on purpose!" I said, seizing him indignantly by the arm.

"I assure you I never thought..." he began, cringing and lying at once,
pretending to be unhappy. "The verses had only just been brought and I thought
that as an amusing pleasantry...."

"You did not think anything of the sort. You can't really think that stupid
rubbish an amusing pleasantry?"

"Yes, I do."

"You are simply lying, and it wasn't brought to you just now. You helped
Lebyadkin to compose it yourself, yesterday very likely, to create a scandal.
The last verse must have been yours, the part about the sexton too. Why did he
come on in a dress-coat? You must have meant him to read it, too, if he had not
been drunk?"

Liputin looked at me coldly and ironically.

"What business is it of yours?" he asked suddenly with strange calm.

"What business is it of mine? You are wearing the steward's badge, too....
Where is Pyotr Stepanovitch?"

"I don't know, somewhere here; why do you ask?"

"Because now I see through it. It's simply a plot against Yulia Mihailovna so
as to ruin the day by a scandal...."

Liputin looked at me askance again.

"But what is it to you?" he said, grinning. He shrugged his shoulders and
walked away.

It came over me with a rush. All my suspicions were confirmed. Till then, I had
been hoping I was mistaken! What was I to do? I was on the point of asking the
advice of Stepan Trofimovitch, but he was standing before the looking-glass,
trying on different smiles, and continually consulting a piece of paper on
which he had notes. He had to go on immediately after Karmazinov, and was not
in a fit state for conversation. Should I run to Yulia Mihailovna? But it was
too soon to go to her: she needed a much sterner lesson to cure her of her
conviction that she had "a following," and that every one was "fanatically
devoted" to her. She would not have believed me, and would have thought I was
dreaming. Besides, what help could she be? "Eh," I thought, "after all, what
business is it of mine? I'll take off my badge and go home _when it begins._"
That was my mental phrase, "when it begins"; I remember it.

But I had to go and listen to Karmazinov. Taking a last look round behind the
scenes, I noticed that a good number of outsiders, even women among them, were
flitting about, going in and out. "Behind the scenes" was rather a narrow space
completely screened from the audience by a curtain and communicating with other
rooms by means of a passage. Here our readers were awaiting their turns. But I
was struck at that moment by the reader who was to follow Stepan Trofimovitch.
He, too, was some sort of professor (I don't know to this day exactly what he
was) who had voluntarily left some educational institution after a disturbance
among the students, and had arrived in the town only a few days before. He,
too, had been recommended to Yulia Mihailovna, and she had received him with
reverence. I know now that he had only spent one evening in her company before
the reading; he had not spoken all that evening, had listened with an equivocal
smile to the jests and the general tone of the company surrounding Yulia
Mihailovna, and had made an unpleasant impression on every one by his air of
haughtiness, and at the same time almost timorous readiness to take offence. It
was Yulia Mihailovna herself who had enlisted his services. Now he was walking
from corner to corner, and, like Stepan Trofimovitch, was muttering to himself,
though he looked on the ground instead of in the looking-glass. He was not
trying on smiles, though he often smiled rapaciously. It was obvious that it
was useless to speak to him either. He looked about forty, was short and bald,
had a greyish beard, and was decently dressed. But what was most interesting
about him was that at every turn he took he threw up his right fist, brandished
it above his head and suddenly brought it down again as though crushing an
antagonist to atoms. He went through this by-play every moment. It made me
uncomfortable. I hastened away to listen to Karmazinov.

