# PART II - CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY - III
[Metadata]: # {02.06.03}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.03}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# III
[TreeTag]: # {02.06.03.01}
"What sort of worries? Surely not these trifles?" He nodded towards the
manifesto. "I can bring you as many of them as you like; I made their
acquaintance in X province."

"You mean at the time you were staying there?"

"Of course, it was not in my absence. I remember there was a hatchet printed at
the top of it. Allow me." (He took up the manifesto.) "Yes, there's the hatchet
here too; that's it, the very same."

"Yes, here's a hatchet. You see, a hatchet."

"Well, is it the hatchet that scares you?"

"No, it's not... and I am not scared; but this business... it is a business;
there are circumstances."

"What sort? That it's come from the factory? He he! But do you know, at that
factory the workpeople will soon be writing manifestoes for themselves."

"What do you mean?" Von Lembke stared at him severely.

"What I say. You've only to look at them. You are too soft, Andrey Antonovitch;
you write novels. But this has to be handled in the good old way."

"What do you mean by the good old way? What do you mean by advising me? The
factory has been cleaned; I gave the order and they've cleaned it."

"And the workmen are in rebellion. They ought to be flogged, every one of them;
that would be the end of it."

"In rebellion? That's nonsense; I gave the order and they've cleaned it."

"Ech, you are soft, Andrey Antonovitch!"

"In the first place, I am not so soft as you think, and in the second place..."
Von Lembke was piqued again. He had exerted himself to keep up the conversation
with the young man from curiosity, wondering if he would tell him anything new.

"Ha ha, an old acquaintance again," Pyotr Stepanovitch interrupted, pouncing on
another document that lay under a paper-weight, something like a manifesto,
obviously printed abroad and in verse. "Oh, come, I know this one by heart, 'A
Noble Personality.' Let me have a look at it--yes, 'A Noble Personality' it is.
I made acquaintance with that personality abroad. Where did you unearth it?"

"You say you've seen it abroad?" Von Lembke said eagerly.

"I should think so, four months ago, or may be five."

"You seem to have seen a great deal abroad." Von Lembke looked at him subtly.

Pyotr Stepanovitch, not heeding him, unfolded the document and read the poem
aloud:

"A NOBLE PERSONALITY

"He was not of rank exalted,      He was not of noble birth,      He was bred
among the people      In the breast of Mother Earth.      But the malice of the
nobles      And the Tsar's revengeful wrath      Drove him forth to grief and
torture      On the martyr's chosen path.      He set out to teach the people
Freedom, love, equality,      To exhort them to resistance; But to flee the
penalty      Of the prison, whip and gallows,      To a foreign land he went.
While the people waited hoping      From Smolensk to far Tashkent, Waited eager
for his coming      To rebel against their fate,      To arise and crush the
Tsardom      And the nobles' vicious hate, To share all the wealth in common,
And the antiquated thrall      Of the church, the home and marriage      To
abolish once for all."

"You got it from that officer, I suppose, eh?" asked Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"Why, do you know that officer, then, too?"

"I should think so. I had a gay time with him there for two days; he was bound
to go out of his mind."

"Perhaps he did not go out of his mind."

"You think he didn't because he began to bite?"

"But, excuse me, if you saw those verses abroad and then, it appears, at that
officer's..."

"What, puzzling, is it? You are putting me through an examination, Andrey
Antonovitch, I see. You see," he began suddenly with extraordinary dignity, "as
to what I saw abroad I have already given explanations, and my explanations
were found satisfactory, otherwise I should not have been gratifying this town
with my presence. I consider that the question as regards me has been settled,
and I am not obliged to give any further account of myself, not because I am an
informer, but because I could not help acting as I did. The people who wrote to
Yulia Mihailovna about me knew what they were talking about, and they said I
was an honest man.... But that's neither here nor there; I've come to see you
about a serious matter, and it's as well you've sent your chimney-sweep away.
It's a matter of importance to me, Andrey Antonovitch. I shall have a very
great favour to ask of you."

"A favour? H'm... by all means; I am waiting and, I confess, with curiosity.
And I must add, Pyotr Stepanovitch, that you surprise me not a little."

Von Lembke was in some agitation. Pyotr Stepanovitch crossed his legs.

"In Petersburg," he began, "I talked freely of most things, but there were
things--this, for instance" (he tapped the "Noble Personality" with his finger)
"about which I held my tongue--in the first place, because it wasn't worth
talking about, and secondly, because I only answered questions. I don't care to
put myself forward in such matters; in that I see the distinction between a
rogue and an honest man forced by circumstances. Well, in short, we'll dismiss
that. But now... now that these fools... now that this has come to the surface
and is in your hands, and I see that you'll find out all about it--for you are
a man with eyes and one can't tell beforehand what you'll do--and these fools
are still going on, I... I... well, the fact is, I've come to ask you to save
one man, a fool too, most likely mad, for the sake of his youth, his
misfortunes, in the name of your humanity.... You can't be so humane only in
the novels you manufacture!" he said, breaking off with coarse sarcasm and
impatience.

In fact, he was seen to be a straightforward man, awkward and impolitic from
excess of humane feeling and perhaps from excessive sensitiveness--above all, a
man of limited intelligence, as Von Lembke saw at once with extraordinary
subtlety. He had indeed long suspected it, especially when during the previous
week he had, sitting alone in his study at night, secretly cursed him with all
his heart for the inexplicable way in which he had gained Yulia Mihailovna's
good graces.

"For whom are you interceding, and what does all this mean?" he inquired
majestically, trying to conceal his curiosity.

"It... it's... damn it! It's not my fault that I trust you! Is it my fault that
I look upon you as a most honourable and, above all, a sensible man... capable,
that is, of understanding... damn..."

The poor fellow evidently could not master his emotion.

"You must understand at last," he went on, "you must understand that in
pronouncing his name I am betraying him to you--I am betraying him, am I not? I
am, am I not?"

"But how am I to guess if you don't make up your mind to speak out?"

"That's just it; you always cut the ground from under one's feet with your
logic, damn it.... Well, here goes... this 'noble personality,' this
'student'... is Shatov... that's all."

"Shatov? How do you mean it's Shatov?"

"Shatov is the 'student' who is mentioned in this. He lives here, he was once a
serf, the man who gave that slap...."

"I know, I know." Lembke screwed up his eyes. "But excuse me, what is he
accused of? Precisely and, above all, what is your petition?"

"I beg you to save him, do you understand? I used to know him eight years ago,
I might almost say I was his friend," cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, completely
carried away. "But I am not bound to give you an account of my past life," he
added, with a gesture of dismissal. "All this is of no consequence; it's the
case of three men and a half, and with those that are abroad you can't make up
a dozen. But what I am building upon is your humanity and your intelligence.
You will understand and you will put the matter in its true light, as the
foolish dream of a man driven crazy... by misfortunes, by continued
misfortunes, and not as some impossible political plot or God knows what!"

He was almost gasping for breath.

"H'm. I see that he is responsible for the manifestoes with the axe," Lembke
concluded almost majestically. "Excuse me, though, if he were the only person
concerned, how could he have distributed it both here and in other districts
and in the X province... and, above all, where did he get them?"

"But I tell you that at the utmost there are not more than five people in it--a
dozen perhaps. How can I tell?"

"You don't know?"

"How should I know?--damn it all."

"Why, you knew that Shatov was one of the conspirators."

"Ech!" Pyotr Stepanovitch waved his hand as though to keep off the overwhelming
penetration of the inquirer. "Well, listen. I'll tell you the whole truth: of
the manifestoes I know nothing--that is, absolutely nothing. Damn it all, don't
you know what nothing means?... That sub-lieutenant, to be sure, and somebody
else and someone else here... and Shatov perhaps and someone else too--well,
that's the lot of them... a wretched lot.... But I've come to intercede for
Shatov. He must be saved, for this poem is his, his own composition, and it was
through him it was published abroad; that I know for a fact, but of the
manifestoes I really know nothing."

"If the poem is his work, no doubt the manifestoes are too. But what data have
you for suspecting Mr. Shatov?"

Pyotr Stepanovitch, with the air of a man driven out of all patience, pulled a
pocket-book out of his pocket and took a note out of it.

"Here are the facts," he cried, flinging it on the table.

Lembke unfolded it; it turned out to be a note written six months before from
here to some address abroad. It was a brief note, only two lines:

"I can't print 'A Noble Personality' here, and in fact I can do nothing; print
it abroad. "Iv. Shatov."

Lembke looked intently at Pyotr Stepanovitch. Varvara Petrovna had been right
in saying that he had at times the expression of a sheep.

"You see, it's like this," Pyotr Stepanovitch burst out. "He wrote this poem
here six months ago, but he couldn't get it printed here, in a secret printing
press, and so he asks to have it printed abroad.... That seems clear."

"Yes, that's clear, but to whom did he write? That's not clear yet," Lembke
observed with the most subtle irony.

"Why, Kirillov, of course; the letter was written to Kirillov abroad.... Surely
you knew that? What's so annoying is that perhaps you are only putting it on
before me, and most likely you knew all about this poem and everything long
ago! How did it come to be on your table? It found its way there somehow! Why
are you torturing me, if so?"

He feverishly mopped his forehead with his handkerchief.

"I know something, perhaps." Lembke parried dexterously. "But who is this
Kirillov?"

"An engineer who has lately come to the town. He was Stavrogin's second, a
maniac, a madman; your sub-lieutenant may really only be suffering from
temporary delirium, but Kirillov is a thoroughgoing madman--thoroughgoing, that
I guarantee. Ah, Andrey Antonovitch, if the government only knew what sort of
people these conspirators all are, they wouldn't have the heart to lay a finger
on them. Every single one of them ought to be in an asylum; I had a good look
at them in Switzerland and at the congresses."

"From which they direct the movement here?"

"Why, who directs it? Three men and a half. It makes one sick to think of them.
And what sort of movement is there here? Manifestoes! And what recruits have
they made? Sub-lieutenants in brain fever and two or three students! You are a
sensible man: answer this question. Why don't people of consequence join their
ranks? Why are they all students and half-baked boys of twenty-two? And not
many of those. I dare say there are thousands of bloodhounds on their track,
but have they tracked out many of them? Seven! I tell you it makes one sick."

Lembke listened with attention but with an expression that seemed to say, "You
don't feed nightingales on fairy-tales."

"Excuse me, though. You asserted that the letter was sent abroad, but there's
no address on it; how do you come to know that it was addressed to Mr. Kirillov
and abroad too and... and... that it really was written by Mr. Shatov?"

"Why, fetch some specimen of Shatov's writing and compare it. You must have
some signature of his in your office. As for its being addressed to Kirillov,
it was Kirillov himself showed it me at the time."

"Then you were yourself..."

"Of course I was, myself. They showed me lots of things out there. And as for
this poem, they say it was written by Herzen to Shatov when he was still
wandering abroad, in memory of their meeting, so they say, by way of praise and
recommendation--damn it all... and Shatov circulates it among the young people
as much as to say, 'This was Herzen's opinion of me.'"

"Ha ha!" cried Lembke, feeling he had got to the bottom of it at last. "That's
just what I was wondering: one can understand the manifesto, but what's the
object of the poem?"

"Of course you'd see it. Goodness knows why I've been babbling to you. Listen.
Spare Shatov for me and the rest may go to the devil--even Kirillov, who is in
hiding now, shut up in Filipov's house, where Shatov lodges too. They don't
like me because I've turned round... but promise me Shatov and I'll dish them
all up for you. I shall be of use, Andrey Antonovitch! I reckon nine or ten men
make up the whole wretched lot. I am keeping an eye on them myself, on my own
account. We know of three already: Shatov, Kirillov, and that sub-lieutenant.
The others I am only watching carefully... though I am pretty sharp-sighted
too. It's the same over again as it was in the X province: two students, a
schoolboy, two noblemen of twenty, a teacher, and a half-pay major of sixty,
crazy with drink, have been caught with manifestoes; that was all--you can take
my word for it, that was all; it was quite a surprise that that was all. But I
must have six days. I have reckoned it out--six days, not less. If you want to
arrive at any result, don't disturb them for six days and I can kill all the
birds with one stone for you; but if you flutter them before, the birds will
fly away. But spare me Shatov. I speak for Shatov.... The best plan would be to
fetch him here secretly, in a friendly way, to your study and question him
without disguising the facts.... I have no doubt he'll throw himself at your
feet and burst into tears! He is a highly strung and unfortunate fellow; his
wife is carrying on with Stavrogin. Be kind to him and he will tell you
everything, but I must have six days.... And, above all, above all, not a word
to Yulia Mihailovna. It's a secret. May it be a secret?"

"What?" cried Lembke, opening wide his eyes. "Do you mean to say you said
nothing of this to Yulia Mihailovna?"

"To her? Heaven forbid! Ech, Andrey Antonovitch! You see, I value her
friendship and I have the highest respect for her... and all the rest of it...
but I couldn't make such a blunder. I don't contradict her, for, as you know
yourself, it's dangerous to contradict her. I may have dropped a word to her,
for I know she likes that, but to suppose that I mentioned names to her as I
have to you or anything of that sort! My good sir! Why am I appealing to you?
Because you are a man, anyway, a serious person with old-fashioned firmness and
experience in the service. You've seen life. You must know by heart every
detail of such affairs, I expect, from what you've seen in Petersburg. But if I
were to mention those two names, for instance, to her, she'd stir up such a
hubbub.... You know, she would like to astonish Petersburg. No, she's too
hot-headed, she really is."

"Yes, she has something of that _fougue,_" Andrey Antonovitch muttered with
some satisfaction, though at the same time he resented this unmannerly fellow's
daring to express himself rather freely about Yulia Mihailovna. But Pyotr
Stepanovitch probably imagined that he had not gone far enough and that he must
exert himself further to flatter Lembke and make a complete conquest of him.

"_Fougue_ is just it," he assented. "She may be a woman of genius, a literary
woman, but she would scare our sparrows. She wouldn't be able to keep quiet for
six hours, let alone six days. Ech, Andrey Antonovitch, don't attempt to tie a
woman down for six days! You do admit that I have some experience--in this sort
of thing, I mean; I know something about it, and you know that I may very well
know something about it. I am not asking for six days for fun but with an
object."

"I have heard..." (Lembke hesitated to utter his thought) "I have heard that on
your return from abroad you made some expression... as it were of repentance,
in the proper quarter?"

"Well, that's as it may be."

"And, of course, I don't want to go into it.... But it has seemed to me all
along that you've talked in quite a different style--about the Christian faith,
for instance, about social institutions, about the government even...."

"I've said lots of things, no doubt, I am saying them still; but such ideas
mustn't be applied as those fools do it, that's the point. What's the good of
biting his superior's shoulder! You agreed with me yourself, only you said it
was premature."

"I didn't mean that when I agreed and said it was premature."

"You weigh every word you utter, though. He he! You are a careful man!" Pyotr
Stepanovitch observed gaily all of a sudden. "Listen, old friend. I had to get
to know you; that's why I talked in my own style. You are not the only one I
get to know like that. Maybe I needed to find out your character."

"What's my character to you?"

"How can I tell what it may be to me?" He laughed again. "You see, my dear and
highly respected Andrey Antonovitch, you are cunning, but it's not come to
_that_ yet and it certainly never will come to it, you understand? Perhaps you
do understand. Though I did make an explanation in the proper quarter when I
came back from abroad, and I really don't know why a man of certain convictions
should not be able to work for the advancement of his sincere convictions...
but nobody _there_ has yet instructed me to investigate your character and I've
not undertaken any such job from _them._ Consider: I need not have given those
two names to you. I might have gone straight _there;_ that is where I made my
first explanations. And if I'd been acting with a view to financial profit or
my own interest in any way, it would have been a bad speculation on my part,
for now they'll be grateful to you and not to me at headquarters. I've done it
solely for Shatov's sake," Pyotr Stepanovitch added generously, "for Shatov's
sake, because of our old friendship.... But when you take up your pen to write
to headquarters, you may put in a word for me, if you like.... I'll make no
objection, he he! _Adieu,_ though; I've stayed too long and there was no need
to gossip so much!" he added with some amiability, and he got up from the sofa.

"On the contrary, I am very glad that the position has been defined, so to
speak." Von Lembke too got up and he too looked pleasant, obviously affected by
the last words. "I accept your services and acknowledge my obligation, and you
may be sure that anything I can do by way of reporting your zeal..."

"Six days--the great thing is to put it off for six days, and that you
shouldn't stir for those six days, that's what I want."

"So be it."

"Of course, I don't tie your hands and shouldn't venture to. You are bound to
keep watch, only don't flutter the nest too soon; I rely on your sense and
experience for that. But I should think you've plenty of bloodhounds and
trackers of your own in reserve, ha ha!" Pyotr Stepanovitch blurted out with
the gaiety and irresponsibility of youth.

"Not quite so." Lembke parried amiably. "Young people are apt to suppose that
there is a great deal in the background.... But, by the way, allow me one
little word: if this Kirillov was Stavrogin's second, then Mr. Stavrogin
too..."

"What about Stavrogin?"

"I mean, if they are such friends?"

"Oh, no, no, no! There you are quite out of it, though you are cunning. You
really surprise me. I thought that you had some information about it.... H'm...
Stavrogin--it's quite the opposite, quite.... _Avis au lecteur."_

"Do you mean it? And can it be so?" Lembke articulated mistrustfully. "Yulia
Mihailovna told me that from what she heard from Petersburg he is a man acting
on some sort of instructions, so to speak...."

"I know nothing about it; I know nothing, absolutely nothing. _Adieu. Avis au
lecteur!_" Abruptly and obviously Pyotr Stepanovitch declined to discuss it.

He hurried to the door.

"Stay, Pyotr Stepanovitch, stay," cried Lembke. "One other tiny matter and I
won't detain you."

He drew an envelope out of a table drawer.

"Here is a little specimen of the same kind of thing, and I let you see it to
show how completely I trust you. Here, and tell me your opinion."

In the envelope was a letter, a strange anonymous letter addressed to Lembke
and only received by him the day before. With intense vexation Pyotr
Stepanovitch read as follows:

"Your excellency,--For such you are by rank. Herewith I make known that there
is an attempt to be made on the life of personages of general's rank and on the
Fatherland. For it's working up straight for that. I myself have been
disseminating unceasingly for a number of years. There's infidelity too.
There's a rebellion being got up and there are some thousands of manifestoes,
and for every one of them there will be a hundred running with their tongues
out, unless they've been taken away beforehand by the police. For they've been
promised a mighty lot of benefits, and the simple people are foolish, and
there's vodka too. The people will attack one after another, taking them to be
guilty, and, fearing both sides, I repent of what I had no share in, my
circumstances being what they are. If you want information to save the
Fatherland, and also the Church and the ikons, I am the only one that can do
it. But only on condition that I get a pardon from the Secret Police by
telegram at once, me alone, but the rest may answer for it. Put a candle every
evening at seven o'clock in the porter's window for a signal. Seeing it, I
shall believe and come to kiss the merciful hand from Petersburg. But on
condition there's a pension for me, for else how am I to live? You won't regret
it for it will mean a star for you. You must go secretly or they'll wring your
neck. Your excellency's desperate servant falls at your feet.

"Repentant free-thinker incognito."


Von Lembke explained that the letter had made its appearance in the porter's
room when it was left empty the day before.

"So what do you think?" Pyotr Stepanovitch asked almost rudely.

"I think it's an anonymous skit by way of a hoax."

"Most likely it is. There's no taking you in."

"What makes me think that is that it's so stupid."

"Have you received such documents here before?"

"Once or twice, anonymous letters."

"Oh, of course they wouldn't be signed. In a different style? In different
handwritings?"

"Yes."

"And were they buffoonery like this one?"

"Yes, and you know... very disgusting."

"Well, if you had them before, it must be the same thing now."

"Especially because it's so stupid. Because these people are educated and
wouldn't write so stupidly."

"Of course, of course."

"But what if this is someone who really wants to turn informer?"

"It's not very likely," Pyotr Stepanovitch rapped out dryly. "What does he mean
by a telegram from the Secret Police and a pension? It's obviously a hoax."

"Yes, yes," Lembke admitted, abashed.

"I tell you what: you leave this with me. I can certainly find out for you
before I track out the others."

"Take it," Lembke assented, though with some hesitation.

"Have you shown it to anyone?"

"Is it likely! No."

"Not to Yulia Mihailovna?"

"Oh, Heaven forbid! And for God's sake don't you show it her!" Lembke cried in
alarm. "She'll be so upset... and will be dreadfully angry with me."

"Yes, you'll be the first to catch it; she'd say you brought it on yourself if
people write like that to you. I know what women's logic is. Well, good-bye. I
dare say I shall bring you the writer in a couple of days or so. Above all, our
compact!"

