# PART III - CHAPTER III. A ROMANCE ENDED - II
[Metadata]: # {03.03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {03.03.02.01}
The room from which Pyotr Stepanovitch had peeped in was a large oval
vestibule. Alexey Yegorytch had been sitting there before Pyotr Stepanovitch
came in, but the latter sent him away. Stavrogin closed the door after him and
stood expectant. Pyotr Stepanovitch looked rapidly and searchingly at him.

"Well?"

"If you know already," said Pyotr Stepanovitch hurriedly, his eyes looking as
though they would dive into Stavrogin's soul, "then, of course, we are none of
us to blame, above all not you, for it's such a concatenation... such a
coincidence of events... in brief, you can't be legally implicated and I've
rushed here to tell you so beforehand."

"Have they been burnt? murdered?"

"Murdered but not burnt, that's the trouble, but I give you my word of honour
that it's not been my fault, however much you may suspect me, eh? Do you want
the whole truth: you see the idea really did cross my mind--you hinted it
yourself, not seriously, but teasing me (for, of course, you would not hint it
seriously), but I couldn't bring myself to it, and wouldn't bring myself to it
for anything, not for a hundred roubles--and what was there to be gained by it,
I mean for me, for me...." (He was in desperate haste and his talk was like the
clacking of a rattle.) "But what a coincidence of circumstances: I gave that
drunken fool Lebyadkin two hundred and thirty roubles of my own money (do you
hear, my own money, there wasn't a rouble of yours and, what's more, you know
it yourself) the day before yesterday, in the evening--do you hear, not
yesterday after the matinée, but the day before yesterday, make a note of it:
it's a very important coincidence for I did not know for certain at that time
whether Lizaveta Nikolaevna would come to you or not; I gave my own money
simply because you distinguished yourself by taking it into your head to betray
your secret to every one. Well, I won't go into that... that's your affair...
your chivalry, but I must own I was amazed, it was a knock-down blow. And
forasmuch as I was exceeding weary of these tragic stories--and let me tell
you, I talk seriously though I do use Biblical language--as it was all
upsetting my plans in fact, I made up my mind at any cost, and without your
knowledge, to pack the Lebyadkins off to Petersburg, especially as he was set
on going himself. I made one mistake: I gave the money in your name;--was it a
mistake or not? Perhaps it wasn't a mistake, eh? Listen now, listen how it has
all turned out...."

In the heat of his talk he went close up to Stavrogin and took hold of the
revers of his coat (really, it may have been on purpose). With a violent
movement Stavrogin struck him on the arm.

"Come, what is it... give over... you'll break my arm... what matters is the
way things have turned out," he rattled on, not in the least surprised at the
blow. "I forked out the money in the evening on condition that his sister and
he should set off early next morning; I trusted that rascal Liputin with the
job of getting them into the train and seeing them off. But that beast Liputin
wanted to play his schoolboy pranks on the public--perhaps you heard? At the
matinée? Listen, listen: they both got drunk, made up verses of which half are
Liputin's; he rigged Lebyadkin out in a dress-coat, assuring me meanwhile that
he had packed him off that morning, but he kept him shut somewhere in a back
room, till he thrust him on the platform at the matinée. But Lebyadkin got
drunk quickly and unexpectedly. Then came the scandalous scene you know of, and
then they got him home more dead than alive, and Liputin filched away the two
hundred roubles, leaving him only small change. But it appears unluckily that
already that morning Lebyadkin had taken that two hundred roubles out of his
pocket, boasted of it and shown it in undesirable quarters. And as that was
just what Fedka was expecting, and as he had heard something at Kirillov's (do
you remember, your hint?) he made up his mind to take advantage of it. That's
the whole truth. I am glad, anyway, that Fedka did not find the money, the
rascal was reckoning on a thousand, you know! He was in a hurry and seems to
have been frightened by the fire himself.... Would you believe it, that fire
came as a thunderbolt for me. Devil only knows what to make of it! It is taking
things into their own hands.... You see, as I expect so much of you I will hide
nothing from you: I've long been hatching this idea of a fire because it suits
the national and popular taste; but I was keeping it for a critical moment, for
that precious time when we should all rise up and... And they suddenly took it
into their heads to do it, on their own initiative, without orders, now at the
very moment when we ought to be lying low and keeping quiet! Such
presumption!... The fact is, I've not got to the bottom of it yet, they talk
about two Shpigulin men, but if there are any of _our_ fellows in it, if any
one of them has had a hand in it--so much the worse for him! You see what comes
of letting people get ever so little out of hand! No, this democratic rabble,
with its quintets, is a poor foundation; what we want is one magnificent,
despotic will, like an idol, resting on something fundamental and external....
Then the quintets will cringe into obedience and be obsequiously ready on
occasion. But, anyway, though, they are all crying out now that Stavrogin
wanted his wife to be burnt and that that's what caused the fire in the town,
but..."

"Why, are they all saying that?"

"Well, not yet, and I must confess I have heard nothing of the sort, but what
one can do with people, especially when they've been burnt out! _Vox populi vox
Dei_. A stupid rumour is soon set going. But you really have nothing to be
afraid of. From the legal point of view you are all right, and with your
conscience also. For you didn't want it done, did you? There's no clue, nothing
but the coincidence.... The only thing is Fedka may remember what you said that
night at Kirillov's (and what made you say it?) but that proves nothing and we
shall stop Fedka's mouth. I shall stop it to-day...."

"And weren't the bodies burnt at all?"

"Not a bit; that ruffian could not manage anything properly. But I am glad,
anyway, that you are so calm... for though you are not in any way to blame,
even in thought, but all the same.... And you must admit that all this settles
your difficulties capitally: you are suddenly free and a widower and can marry
a charming girl this minute with a lot of money, who is already yours, into the
bargain. See what can be done by crude, simple coincidence--eh?"

"Are you threatening me, you fool?"

"Come, leave off, leave off! Here you are, calling me a fool, and what a tone
to use! You ought to be glad, yet you... I rushed here on purpose to let you
know in good time.... Besides, how could I threaten you? As if I cared for what
I could get by threats! I want you to help from goodwill and not from fear. You
are the light and the sun.... It's I who am terribly afraid of you, not you of
me! I am not Mavriky Nikolaevitch.... And only fancy, as I flew here in a
racing droshky I saw Mavriky Nikolaevitch by the fence at the farthest corner
of your garden... in his greatcoat, drenched through, he must have been sitting
there all night! Queer goings on! How mad people can be!"

"Mavriky Nikolaevitch? Is that true?"

"Yes, yes. He is sitting by the garden fence. About three hundred paces from
here, I think. I made haste to pass him, but he saw me. Didn't you know? In
that case I am glad I didn't forget to tell you. A man like that is more
dangerous than anyone if he happens to have a revolver about him, and then the
night, the sleet, or natural irritability--for after all he is in a nice
position, ha ha! What do you think? Why is he sitting there?"

"He is waiting for Lizaveta Nikolaevna, of course."

"Well! Why should she go out to him? And... in such rain too... what a fool!"

"She is just going out to him!"

"Eh! That's a piece of news! So then... But listen, her position is completely
changed now. What does she want with Mavriky now? You are free, a widower, and
can marry her to-morrow. She doesn't know yet--leave it to me and I'll arrange
it all for you. Where is she? We must relieve her mind too."

"Relieve her mind?"

"Rather! Let's go."

"And do you suppose she won't guess what those dead bodies mean?" said
Stavrogin, screwing up his eyes in a peculiar way.

"Of course she won't," said Pyotr Stepanovitch with all the confidence of a
perfect simpleton, "for legally... Ech, what a man you are! What if she did
guess? Women are so clever at shutting their eyes to such things, you don't
understand women! Apart from it's being altogether to her interest to marry you
now, because there's no denying she's disgraced herself; apart from that, I
talked to her of 'the boat' and I saw that one could affect her by it, so that
shows you what the girl is made of. Don't be uneasy, she will step over those
dead bodies without turning a hair--especially as you are not to blame for
them; not in the least, are you? She will only keep them in reserve to use them
against you when you've been married two or three years. Every woman saves up
something of the sort out of her husband's past when she gets married, but by
that time... what may not happen in a year? Ha ha!"

"If you've come in a racing droshky, take her to Mavriky Nikolaevitch now. She
said just now that she could not endure me and would leave me, and she
certainly will not accept my carriage."

"What! Can she really be leaving? How can this have come about?" said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, staring stupidly at him.

"She's guessed somehow during this night that I don't love her... which she
knew all along, indeed."

"But don't you love her?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, with an expression of
extreme surprise. "If so, why did you keep her when she came to you yesterday,
instead of telling her plainly like an honourable man that you didn't care for
her? That was horribly shabby on your part; and how mean you make me look in
her eyes!"

Stavrogin suddenly laughed.

"I am laughing at my monkey," he explained at once.

"Ah! You saw that I was putting it on!" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch, laughing too,
with great enjoyment. "I did it to amuse you! Only fancy, as soon as you came
out to me I guessed from your face that you'd been 'unlucky.' A complete
fiasco, perhaps. Eh? There! I'll bet anything," he cried, almost gasping with
delight, "that you've been sitting side by side in the drawing-room all night
wasting your precious time discussing something lofty and elevated.... There,
forgive me, forgive me; it's not my business. I felt sure yesterday that it
would all end in foolishness. I brought her to you simply to amuse you, and to
show you that you wouldn't have a dull time with me. I shall be of use to you a
hundred times in that way. I always like pleasing people. If you don't want her
now, which was what I was reckoning on when I came, then..."

"So you brought her simply for my amusement?"

"Why, what else?"

"Not to make me kill my wife?"

"Come. You've not killed her? What a tragic fellow you are!

"It's just the same; you killed her."

"I didn't kill her! I tell you I had no hand in it.... You are beginning to
make me uneasy, though...."

"Go on. You said, 'if you don't want her now, then... '"

"Then, leave it to me, of course. I can quite easily marry her off to Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, though I didn't make him sit down by the fence. Don't take that
notion into your head. I am afraid of him, now. You talk about my droshky, but
I simply dashed by.... What if he has a revolver? It's a good thing I brought
mine. Here it is." He brought a revolver out of his pocket, showed it, and hid
it again at once. "I took it as I was coming such a long way.... But I'll
arrange all that for you in a twinkling: her little heart is aching at this
moment for Mavriky; it should be, anyway.... And, do you know, I am really
rather sorry for her? If I take her to Mavriky she will begin about you
directly; she will praise you to him and abuse him to his face. You know the
heart of woman! There you are, laughing again! I am awfully glad that you are
so cheerful now. Come, let's go. I'll begin with Mavriky right away, and about
them... those who've been murdered... hadn't we better keep quiet now? She'll
hear later on, anyway."

"What will she hear? Who's been murdered? What were you saying about Mavriky
Nikolaevitch?" said Liza, suddenly opening the door.

"Ah! You've been listening?"

"What were you saying just now about Mavriky Nikolaevitch? Has he been
murdered?"

"Ah! Then you didn't hear? Don't distress yourself, Mavriky Nikolaevitch is
alive and well, and you can satisfy yourself of it in an instant, for he is
here by the wayside, by the garden fence... and I believe he's been sitting
there all night. He is drenched through in his greatcoat! He saw me as I drove
past."

"That's not true. You said 'murdered.'... Who's been murdered?" she insisted
with agonising mistrust.

"The only people who have been murdered are my wife, her brother Lebyadkin, and
their servant," Stavrogin brought out firmly.

Liza trembled and turned terribly pale.

"A strange brutal outrage, Lizaveta Nikolaevna. A simple case of robbery,"
Pyotr Stepanovitch rattled off at once "Simply robbery, under cover of the
fire. The crime was committed by Fedka the convict, and it was all that fool
Lebyadkin's fault for showing every one his money.... I rushed here with the
news... it fell on me like a thunderbolt. Stavrogin could hardly stand when I
told him. We were deliberating here whether to tell you at once or not?"

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, is he telling the truth?" Liza articulated faintly.

"No; it's false."

"False?" said Pyotr Stepanovitch, starting. "What do you mean by that?"

"Heavens! I shall go mad!" cried Liza.

"Do you understand, anyway, that he is mad now!" Pyotr Stepanovitch cried at
the top of his voice. "After all, his wife has just been murdered. You see how
white he is.... Why, he has been with you the whole night. He hasn't left your
side a minute. How can you suspect him?"

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, tell me, as before God, are you guilty or not, and I
swear I'll believe your word as though it were God's, and I'll follow you to
the end of the earth. Yes, I will. I'll follow you like a dog."

"Why are you tormenting her, you fantastic creature?" cried Pyotr Stepanovitch
in exasperation. "Lizaveta Nikolaevna, upon my oath, you can crush me into
powder, but he is not guilty. On the contrary, it has crushed him, and he is
raving, you see that. He is not to blame in any way, not in any way, not even
in thought!... It's all the work of robbers who will probably be found within a
week and flogged.... It's all the work of Fedka the convict, and some Shpigulin
men, all the town is agog with it. That's why I say so too."

"Is that right? Is that right?" Liza waited trembling for her final sentence.

"I did not kill them, and I was against it, but I knew they were going to be
killed and I did not stop the murderers. Leave me, Liza," Stavrogin brought
out, and he walked into the drawing-room.

Liza hid her face in her hands and walked out of the house. Pyotr Stepanovitch
was rushing after her, but at once hurried back and went into the drawing-room.

"So that's your line? That's your line? So there's nothing you are afraid of?"
He flew at Stavrogin in an absolute fury, muttering incoherently, scarcely able
to find words and foaming at the mouth.

Stavrogin stood in the middle of the room and did not answer a word. He
clutched a lock of his hair in his left hand and smiled helplessly. Pyotr
Stepanovitch pulled him violently by the sleeve.

"Is it all over with you? So that's the line you are taking? You'll inform
against all of us, and go to a monastery yourself, or to the devil.... But I'll
do for you, though you are not afraid of me!"

"Ah! That's you chattering!" said Stavrogin, noticing him at last. "Run," he
said, coming to himself suddenly, "run after her, order the carriage, don't
leave her.... Run, run! Take her home so that no one may know... and that she
mayn't go there... to the bodies... to the bodies.... Force her to get into the
carriage... Alexey Yegorytch! Alexey Yegorytch!"

"Stay, don't shout! By now she is in Mavriky's arms.... Mavriky won't put her
into your carriage.... Stay! There's something more important than the
carriage!"

He seized his revolver again. Stavrogin looked at him gravely.

"Very well, kill me," he said softly, almost conciliatorily.

"Foo. Damn it! What a maze of false sentiment a man can get into!" said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, shaking with rage. "Yes, really, you ought to be killed! She
ought simply to spit at you! Fine sort of 'magic boat,' you are; you are a
broken-down, leaky old hulk!... You ought to pull yourself together if only
from spite! Ech! Why, what difference would it make to you since you ask for a
bullet through your brains yourself?"

Stavrogin smiled strangely.

"If you were not such a buffoon I might perhaps have said yes now.... If you
had only a grain of sense..."

"I am a buffoon, but I don't want you, my better half, to be one! Do you
understand me?"

Stavrogin did understand, though perhaps no one else did. Shatov, for instance,
was astonished when Stavrogin told him that Pyotr Stepanovitch had enthusiasm.

"Go to the devil now, and to-morrow perhaps I may wring something out of
myself. Come to-morrow."

"Yes? Yes?"

"How can I tell?... Go to hell. Go to hell." And he walked out of the room.

"Perhaps, after all, it may be for the best," Pyotr Stepanovitch muttered to
himself as he hid the revolver.

