# PART I - CHAPTER IV. THE CRIPPLE - VII
[Metadata]: # {01.04.06}
[Descriptor]: # {01.04.06}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER IV. THE CRIPPLE
VII
# VII
This "next day," the very Sunday which was to decide Stepan Trofimovitch's fate
irrevocably, was one of the most memorable days in my chronicle. It was a day
of surprises, a day that solved past riddles and suggested new ones, a day of
startling revelations, and still more hopeless perplexity. In the morning, as
the reader is already aware, I had by Varvara Petrovna's particular request to
accompany my friend on his visit to her, and at three o'clock in the afternoon
I had to be with Lizaveta Nikolaevna in order to tell her--I did not know
what--and to assist her--I did not know how. And meanwhile it all ended as no
one could have expected. In a word, it was a day of wonderful coincidences.

To begin with, when Stepan Trofimovitch and I arrived at Varvara Petrovna's at
twelve o'clock punctually, the time she had fixed, we did not find her at home;
she had not yet come back from church. My poor friend was so disposed, or, more
accurately speaking, so indisposed that this circumstance crushed him at once;
he sank almost helpless into an arm-chair in the drawing-room. I suggested a
glass of water; but in spite of his pallor and the trembling of his hands, he
refused it with dignity. His get-up for the occasion was, by the way, extremely
recherch√©: a shirt of batiste and embroidered, almost fit for a ball, a white
tie, a new hat in his hand, new straw-coloured gloves, and even a suspicion of
scent. We had hardly sat down when Shatov was shown in by the butler, obviously
also by official invitation. Stepan Trofimovitch was rising to shake hands with
him, but Shatov, after looking attentively at us both, turned away into a
corner, and sat down there without even nodding to us. Stepan Trofimovitch
looked at me in dismay again.

We sat like this for some minutes longer in complete silence. Stepan
Trofimovitch suddenly began whispering something to me very quickly, but I
could not catch it; and indeed, he was so agitated himself that he broke off
without finishing. The butler came in once more, ostensibly to set something
straight on the table, more probably to take a look at us.

Shatov suddenly addressed him with a loud question:

"Alexey Yegorytch, do you know whether Darya Pavlovna has gone with her?"

"Varvara Petrovna was pleased to drive to the cathedral alone, and Darya
Pavlovna was pleased to remain in her room upstairs, being indisposed," Alexey
Yegorytch announced formally and reprovingly.

My poor friend again stole a hurried and agitated glance at me, so that at last
I turned away from him. Suddenly a carriage rumbled at the entrance, and some
commotion at a distance in the house made us aware of the lady's return. We all
leapt up from our easy chairs, but again a surprise awaited us; we heard the
noise of many footsteps, so our hostess must have returned not alone, and this
certainly was rather strange, since she had fixed that time herself. Finally,
we heard some one come in with strange rapidity as though running, in a way
that Varvara Petrovna could not have come in. And, all at once she almost flew
into the room, panting and extremely agitated. After her a little later and
much more quickly Lizaveta Nikolaevna came in, and with her, hand in hand,
Marya Timofyevna Lebyadkin! If I had seen this in my dreams, even then I should
not have believed it.

To explain their utterly unexpected appearance, I must go back an hour and
describe more in detail an extraordinary adventure which had befallen Varvara
Petrovna in church.

In the first place almost the whole town, that is, of course, all of the upper
stratum of society, were assembled in the cathedral. It was known that the
governor's wife was to make her appearance there for the first time since her
arrival amongst us. I must mention that there were already rumours that she was
a free-thinker, and a follower of "the new principles." All the ladies were
also aware that she would be dressed with magnificence and extraordinary
elegance. And so the costumes of our ladies were elaborate and gorgeous for the
occasion.

Only Varvara Petrovna was modestly dressed in black as she always was, and had
been for the last four years. She had taken her usual place in church in the
first row on the left, and a footman in livery had put down a velvet cushion
for her to kneel on; everything in fact, had been as usual. But it was noticed,
too, that all through the service she prayed with extreme fervour. It was even
asserted afterwards when people recalled it, that she had had tears in her
eyes. The service was over at last, and our chief priest, Father Pavel, came
out to deliver a solemn sermon. We liked his sermons and thought very highly of
them. We used even to try to persuade him to print them, but he never could
make up his mind to. On this occasion the sermon was a particularly long one.

And behold, during the sermon a lady drove up to the church in an old fashioned
hired droshky, that is, one in which the lady could only sit sideways, holding
on to the driver's sash, shaking at every jolt like a blade of grass in the
breeze. Such droshkys are still to be seen in our town. Stopping at the corner
of the cathedral--for there were a number of carriages, and mounted police too,
at the gates--the lady sprang out of the droshky and handed the driver four
kopecks in silver.

"Isn't it enough, Vanya?" she cried, seeing his grimace. "It's all I've got,"
she added plaintively.

"Well, there, bless you. I took you without fixing the price," said the driver
with a hopeless gesture, and looking at her he added as though reflecting:

"And it would be a sin to take advantage of you too."

Then, thrusting his leather purse into his bosom, he touched up his horse and
drove off, followed by the jeers of the drivers standing near. Jeers, and
wonder too, followed the lady as she made her way to the cathedral gates,
between the carriages and the footmen waiting for their masters to come out.
And indeed, there certainly was something extraordinary and surprising to every
one in such a person's suddenly appearing in the street among people. She was
painfully thin and she limped, she was heavily powdered and rouged; her long
neck was quite bare, she had neither kerchief nor pelisse; she had nothing on
but an old dark dress in spite of the cold and windy, though bright, September
day. She was bareheaded, and her hair was twisted up into a tiny knot, and on
the right side of it was stuck an artificial rose, such as are used to dedicate
cherubs sold in Palm week. I had noticed just such a one with a wreath of paper
roses in a corner under the ikons when I was at Marya Timofyevna's the day
before. To put a finishing-touch to it, though the lady walked with modestly
downcast eyes there was a sly and merry smile on her face. If she had lingered
a moment longer, she would perhaps not have been allowed to enter the
cathedral. But she succeeded in slipping by, and entering the building,
gradually pressed forward.

Though it was half-way through the sermon, and the dense crowd that filled the
cathedral was listening to it with absorbed and silent attention, yet several
pairs of eyes glanced with curiosity and amazement at the new-comer. She sank
on to the floor, bowed her painted face down to it, lay there a long time,
unmistakably weeping; but raising her head again and getting up from her knees,
she soon recovered, and was diverted. Gaily and with evident and intense
enjoyment she let her eyes rove over the faces, and over the walls of the
cathedral. She looked with particular curiosity at some of the ladies, even
standing on tip-toe to look at them, and even laughed once or twice, giggling
strangely. But the sermon was over, and they brought out the cross. The
governor's wife was the first to go up to the cross, but she stopped short two
steps from it, evidently wishing to make way for Varvara Petrovna, who, on her
side, moved towards it quite directly as though she noticed no one in front of
her. There was an obvious and, in its way, clever malice implied in this
extraordinary act of deference on the part of the governor's wife; every one
felt this; Varvara Petrovna must have felt it too; but she went on as before,
apparently noticing no one, and with the same unfaltering air of dignity kissed
the cross, and at once turned to leave the cathedral. A footman in livery
cleared the way for her, though every one stepped back spontaneously to let her
pass. But just as she was going out, in the porch the closely packed mass of
people blocked the way for a moment. Varvara Petrovna stood still, and suddenly
a strange, extraordinary creature, the woman with the paper rose on her head,
squeezed through the people, and fell on her knees before her. Varvara
Petrovna, who was not easily disconcerted, especially in public, looked at her
sternly and with dignity.

I hasten to observe here, as briefly as possible, that though Varvara Petrovna
had become, it was said, excessively careful and even stingy, yet sometimes she
was not sparing of money, especially for benevolent objects. She was a member
of a charitable society in the capital. In the last famine year she had sent
five hundred roubles to the chief committee for the relief of the sufferers,
and people talked of it in the town. Moreover, just before the appointment of
the new governor, she had been on the very point of founding a local committee
of ladies to assist the poorest mothers in the town and in the province. She
was severely censured among us for ambition; but Varvara Petrovna's well-known
strenuousness and, at the same time, her persistence nearly triumphed over all
obstacles. The society was almost formed, and the original idea embraced a
wider and wider scope in the enthusiastic mind of the foundress. She was
already dreaming of founding a similar society in Moscow, and the gradual
expansion of its influence over all the provinces of Russia. And now, with the
sudden change of governor, everything was at a standstill; and the new
governor's wife had, it was said, already uttered in society some biting, and,
what was worse, apt and sensible remarks about the impracticability of the
fundamental idea of such a committee, which was, with additions of course,
repeated to Varvara Petrovna. God alone knows the secrets of men's hearts; but
I imagine that Varvara Petrovna stood still now at the very cathedral gates
positively with a certain pleasure, knowing that the governor's wife and, after
her, all the congregation, would have to pass by immediately, and "let her see
for herself how little I care what she thinks, and what pointed things she says
about the vanity of my benevolence. So much for all of you!"

"What is it my dear? What are you asking?" said Varvara Petrovna, looking more
attentively at the kneeling woman before her, who gazed at her with a fearfully
panic-stricken, shame-faced, but almost reverent expression, and suddenly broke
into the same strange giggle.

"What does she want? Who is she?"

Varvara Petrovna bent an imperious and inquiring gaze on all around her. Every
one was silent.

"You are unhappy? You are in need of help?"

"I am in need.... I have come..." faltered the "unhappy" creature, in a voice
broken with emotion. "I have come only to kiss your hand...."

Again she giggled. With the childish look with which little children caress
someone, begging for a favour, she stretched forward to seize Varvara
Petrovna's hand, but, as though panic-stricken, drew her hands back.

"Is that all you have come for?" said Varvara Petrovna, with a compassionate
smile; but at once she drew her mother-of-pearl purse out of her pocket, took
out a ten-rouble note and gave it to the unknown. The latter took it. Varvara
Petrovna was much interested and evidently did not look upon her as an ordinary
low-class beggar.

"I say, she gave her ten roubles!" someone said in the crowd.

"Let me kiss your hand," faltered the unknown, holding tight in the fingers of
her left hand the corner of the ten-rouble note, which fluttered in the
draught. Varvara Petrovna frowned slightly, and with a serious, almost severe,
face held out her hand. The cripple kissed it with reverence. Her grateful eyes
shone with positive ecstasy. At that moment the governor's wife came up, and a
whole crowd of ladies and high officials flocked after her. The governor's wife
was forced to stand still for a moment in the crush; many people stopped.

"You are trembling. Are you cold?" Varvara Petrovna observed suddenly, and
flinging off her pelisse which a footman caught in mid-air, she took from her
own shoulders a very expensive black shawl, and with her own hands wrapped it
round the bare neck of the still kneeling woman.

"But get up, get up from your knees I beg you!"

The woman got up.

"Where do you live? Is it possible no one knows where she lives?" Varvara
Petrovna glanced round impatiently again. But the crowd was different now: she
saw only the faces of acquaintances, people in society, surveying the scene,
some with severe astonishment, others with sly curiosity and at the same time
guileless eagerness for a sensation, while others positively laughed.

"I believe her name's Lebyadkin," a good-natured person volunteered at last in
answer to Varvara Petrovna. It was our respectable and respected merchant
Andreev, a man in spectacles with a grey beard, wearing Russian dress and
holding a high round hat in his hands. "They live in the Filipovs' house in
Bogoyavlensky Street."

"Lebyadkin? Filipovs' house? I have heard something.... Thank you, Nikon
Semyonitch. But who is this Lebyadkin?"

"He calls himself a captain, a man, it must be said, not over careful in his
behaviour. And no doubt this is his sister. She must have escaped from under
control," Nikon Semyonitch went on, dropping his voice, and glancing
significantly at Varvara Petrovna.

"I understand. Thank you, Nikon Semyonitch. Your name is Mlle. Lebyadkin?"

"No, my name's not Lebyadkin."

"Then perhaps your brother's name is Lebyadkin?"

"My brother's name is Lebyadkin."

"This is what I'll do, I'll take you with me now, my dear, and you shall be
driven from me to your family. Would you like to go with me?"

"Ach, I should!" cried Mlle. Lebyadkin, clasping her hands.

"Auntie, auntie, take me with you too!" the voice of Lizaveta Nikolaevna cried
suddenly.

I must observe that Lizaveta Nikolaevna had come to the cathedral with the
governor's wife, while Praskovya Ivanovna had by the doctor's orders gone for a
drive in her carriage, taking Mavriky Nikolaevitch to entertain her. Liza
suddenly left the governor's wife and ran up to Varvara Petrovna.

"My dear, you know I'm always glad to have you, but what will your mother say?"
Varvara Petrovna began majestically, but she became suddenly confused, noticing
Liza's extraordinary agitation.

"Auntie, auntie, I must come with you!" Liza implored, kissing Varvara
Petrovna.

_"Mais qu'avez vous donc, Lise?"_ the governor's wife asked with expressive
wonder.

"Ah, forgive me, darling, _ch√®re cousine,_ I'm going to auntie's."

Liza turned in passing to her unpleasantly surprised _ch√®re cousine_, and
kissed her twice.

"And tell maman to follow me to auntie's directly; maman meant, fully meant to
come and see you, she said so this morning herself, I forgot to tell you," Liza
pattered on. "I beg your pardon, don't be angry, _Julie,
ch√®re...cousine...._Auntie, I'm ready!"

"If you don't take me with you, auntie, I'll run after your carriage,
screaming," she whispered rapidly and despairingly in Varvara Petrovna's ear;
it was lucky that no one heard. Varvara Petrovna positively staggered back, and
bent her penetrating gaze on the mad girl. That gaze settled everything. She
made up her mind to take Liza with her.

"We must put an end to this!" broke from her lips. "Very well, I'll take you
with pleasure, Liza," she added aloud, "if Yulia Mihailovna is willing to let
you come, of course." With a candid air and straightforward dignity she
addressed the governor's wife directly.

"Oh, certainly, I don't want to deprive her of such a pleasure especially as I
am myself..." Yulia Mihailovna lisped with amazing affability--"I myself...
know well what a fantastic, wilful little head it is!" Yulia Mihailovna gave a
charming smile.

"I thank you extremely," said Varvara Petrovna, with a courteous and dignified
bow.

"And I am the more gratified," Yulia Mihailovna went on, lisping almost
rapturously, flushing all over with agreeable excitement, "that, apart from the
pleasure of being with you Liza should be carried away by such an excellent, I
may say lofty, feeling... of compassion..." (she glanced at the "unhappy
creature") "and... and at the very portal of the temple...."

"Such a feeling does you honour," Varvara Petrovna approved magnificently.
Yulia Mihailovna impulsively held out her hand and Varvara Petrovna with
perfect readiness touched it with her fingers. The general effect was
excellent, the faces of some of those present beamed with pleasure, some bland
and insinuating smiles were to be seen.

In short it was made manifest to every one in the town that it was not Yulia
Mihailovna who had up till now neglected Varvara Petrovna in not calling upon
her, but on the contrary that Varvara Petrovna had "kept Yulia Mihailovna
within bounds at a distance, while the latter would have hastened to pay her a
visit, going on foot perhaps if necessary, had she been fully assured that
Varvara Petrovna would not turn her away." And Varvara Petrovna's prestige was
enormously increased.

"Get in, my dear." Varvara Petrovna motioned Mlle. Lebyadkin towards the
carriage which had driven up.

The "unhappy creature" hurried gleefully to the carriage door, and there the
footman lifted her in.

"What! You're lame!" cried Varvara Petrovna, seeming quite alarmed, and she
turned pale. (Every one noticed it at the time, but did not understand it.)

The carriage rolled away. Varvara Petrovna's house was very near the cathedral.
Liza told me afterwards that Miss Lebyadkin laughed hysterically for the three
minutes that the drive lasted, while Varvara Petrovna sat "as though in a
mesmeric sleep." Liza's own expression.

