# PART II - CHAPTER VI. PYOTR STEPANOVITCH IS BUSY - V
[Metadata]: # {02.06.05}
[Descriptor]: # {02.06.05}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# V
[TreeTag]: # {02.06.05.01}
It was a busy day for Pyotr Stepanovitch. From Von Lembke he hastened to
Bogoyavlensky Street, but as he went along Bykovy Street, past the house where
Karmazinov was staying, he suddenly stopped, grinned, and went into the house.
The servant told him that he was expected, which interested him, as he had said
nothing beforehand of his coming.

But the great writer really had been expecting him, not only that day but the
day before and the day before that. Three days before he had handed him his
manuscript _Merci_ (which he had meant to read at the literary matinée at Yulia
Mihailovna's fête). He had done this out of amiability, fully convinced that he
was agreeably flattering the young man's vanity by letting him read the great
work beforehand. Pyotr Stepanovitch had noticed long before that this
vainglorious, spoiled gentleman, who was so offensively unapproachable for all
but the elect, this writer "with the intellect of a statesman," was simply
trying to curry favour with him, even with avidity. I believe the young man
guessed at last that Karmazinov considered him, if not the leader of the whole
secret revolutionary movement in Russia, at least one of those most deeply
initiated into the secrets of the Russian revolution who had an incontestable
influence on the younger generation. The state of mind of "the cleverest man in
Russia" interested Pyotr Stepanovitch, but hitherto he had, for certain
reasons, avoided explaining himself.

The great writer was staying in the house belonging to his sister, who was the
wife of a _kammerherr_ and had an estate in the neighbourhood. Both she and her
husband had the deepest reverence for their illustrious relation, but to their
profound regret both of them happened to be in Moscow at the time of his visit,
so that the honour of receiving him fell to the lot of an old lady, a poor
relation of the _kammerherr's,_ who had for years lived in the family and
looked after the housekeeping. All the household had moved about on tiptoe
since Karmazinov's arrival. The old lady sent news to Moscow almost every day,
how he had slept, what he had deigned to eat, and had once sent a telegram to
announce that after a dinner-party at the mayor's he was obliged to take a
spoonful of a well-known medicine. She rarely plucked up courage to enter his
room, though he behaved courteously to her, but dryly, and only talked to her
of what was necessary.

When Pyotr Stepanovitch came in, he was eating his morning cutlet with half a
glass of red wine. Pyotr Stepanovitch had been to see him before and always
found him eating this cutlet, which he finished in his presence without ever
offering him anything. After the cutlet a little cup of coffee was served. The
footman who brought in the dishes wore a swallow-tail coat, noiseless boots,
and gloves.

"Ha ha!" Karmazinov got up from the sofa, wiping his mouth with a table-napkin,
and came forward to kiss him with an air of unmixed delight--after the
characteristic fashion of Russians if they are very illustrious. But Pyotr
Stepanovitch knew by experience that, though Karmazinov made a show of kissing
him, he really only proffered his cheek, and so this time he did the same: the
cheeks met. Karmazinov did not show that he noticed it, sat down on the sofa,
and affably offered Pyotr Stepanovitch an easy chair facing him, in which the
latter stretched himself at once.

"You don't... wouldn't like some lunch?" inquired Karmazinov, abandoning his
usual habit but with an air, of course, which would prompt a polite refusal.
Pyotr Stepanovitch at once expressed a desire for lunch. A shade of offended
surprise darkened the face of his host, but only for an instant; he nervously
rang for the servant and, in spite of all his breeding, raised his voice
scornfully as he gave orders for a second lunch to be served.

"What will you have, cutlet or coffee?" he asked once more.

"A cutlet and coffee, and tell him to bring some more wine, I am hungry,"
answered Pyotr Stepanovitch, calmly scrutinising his host's attire. Mr.
Karmazinov was wearing a sort of indoor wadded jacket with pearl buttons, but
it was too short, which was far from becoming to his rather comfortable stomach
and the solid curves of his hips. But tastes differ. Over his knees he had a
checkered woollen plaid reaching to the floor, though it was warm in the room.

"Are you unwell?" commented Pyotr Stepanovitch.

"No, not unwell, but I am afraid of being so in this climate," answered the
writer in his squeaky voice, though he uttered each word with a soft cadence
and agreeable gentlemanly lisp. "I've been expecting you since yesterday."

"Why? I didn't say I'd come."

"No, but you have my manuscript. Have you... read it?"

"Manuscript? Which one?"

Karmazinov was terribly surprised.

"But you've brought it with you, haven't you?" He was so disturbed that he even
left off eating and looked at Pyotr Stepanovitch with a face of dismay.

"Ah, that _Bonjour_ you mean...."

_"Merci."_

"Oh, all right. I'd quite forgotten it and hadn't read it; I haven't had time.
I really don't know, it's not in my pockets... it must be on my table. Don't be
uneasy, it will be found."

"No, I'd better send to your rooms at once. It might be lost; besides, it might
be stolen."

"Oh, who'd want it! But why are you so alarmed? Why, Yulia Mihailovna told me
you always have several copies made--one kept at a notary's abroad, another in
Petersburg, a third in Moscow, and then you send some to a bank, I believe."

"But Moscow might be burnt again and my manuscript with it. No, I'd better send
at once."

"Stay, here it is!" Pyotr Stepanovitch pulled a roll of note-paper out of a
pocket at the back of his coat. "It's a little crumpled. Only fancy, it's been
lying there with my pocket-handkerchief ever since I took it from you; I forgot
it."

Karmazinov greedily snatched the manuscript, carefully examined it, counted the
pages, and laid it respectfully beside him on a special table, for the time, in
such a way that he would not lose sight of it for an instant.

"You don't read very much, it seems?" he hissed, unable to restrain himself.

"No, not very much."

"And nothing in the way of Russian literature?"

"In the way of Russian literature? Let me see, I have read something.... 'On
the Way' or 'Away!' or 'At the Parting of the Ways'-- something of the sort; I
don't remember. It's a long time since I read it, five years ago. I've no
time."

A silence followed.

"When I came I assured every one that you were a very intelligent man, and now
I believe every one here is wild over you."

"Thank you," Pyotr Stepanovitch answered calmly.

Lunch was brought in. Pyotr Stepanovitch pounced on the cutlet with
extraordinary appetite, had eaten it in a trice, tossed off the wine and
swallowed his coffee.

"This boor," thought Karmazinov, looking at him askance as he munched the last
morsel and drained the last drops--"this boor probably understood the biting
taunt in my words... and no doubt he has read the manuscript with eagerness; he
is simply lying with some object. But possibly he is not lying and is only
genuinely stupid. I like a genius to be rather stupid. Mayn't he be a sort of
genius among them? Devil take the fellow!"

He got up from the sofa and began pacing from one end of the room to the other
for the sake of exercise, as he always did after lunch.

"Leaving here soon?" asked Pyotr Stepanovitch from his easy chair, lighting a
cigarette.

"I really came to sell an estate and I am in the hands of my bailiff."

"You left, I believe, because they expected an epidemic out there after the
war?"

"N-no, not entirely for that reason," Mr. Karmazinov went on, uttering his
phrases with an affable intonation, and each time he turned round in pacing the
corner there was a faint but jaunty quiver of his right leg. "I certainly
intend to live as long as I can." He laughed, not without venom. "There is
something in our Russian nobility that makes them wear out very quickly, from
every point of view. But I wish to wear out as late as possible, and now I am
going abroad for good; there the climate is better, the houses are of stone,
and everything stronger. Europe will last my time, I think. What do you think?"

"How can I tell?"

"H'm. If the Babylon out there really does fall, and great will be the fall
thereof (about which I quite agree with you, yet I think it will last my time),
there's nothing to fall here in Russia, comparatively speaking. There won't be
stones to fall, everything will crumble into dirt. Holy Russia has less power
of resistance than anything in the world. The Russian peasantry is still held
together somehow by the Russian God; but according to the latest accounts the
Russian God is not to be relied upon, and scarcely survived the emancipation;
it certainly gave Him a severe shock. And now, what with railways, what with
you... I've no faith in the Russian God."

"And how about the European one?"

"I don't believe in any. I've been slandered to the youth of Russia. I've
always sympathised with every movement among them. I was shown the manifestoes
here. Every one looks at them with perplexity because they are frightened at
the way things are put in them, but every one is convinced of their power even
if they don't admit it to themselves. Everybody has been rolling downhill, and
every one has known for ages that they have nothing to clutch at. I am
persuaded of the success of this mysterious propaganda, if only because Russia
is now pre-eminently the place in all the world where anything you like may
happen without any opposition. I understand only too well why wealthy Russians
all flock abroad, and more and more so every year. It's simply instinct. If the
ship is sinking, the rats are the first to leave it. Holy Russia is a country
of wood, of poverty... and of danger, the country of ambitious beggars in its
upper classes, while the immense majority live in poky little huts. She will be
glad of any way of escape; you have only to present it to her. It's only the
government that still means to resist, but it brandishes its cudgel in the dark
and hits its own men. Everything here is doomed and awaiting the end. Russia as
she is has no future. I have become a German and I am proud of it."

"But you began about the manifestoes. Tell me everything; how do you look at
them?"

"Every one is afraid of them, so they must be influential. They openly unmask
what is false and prove that there is nothing to lay hold of among us, and
nothing to lean upon. They speak aloud while all is silent. What is most
effective about them (in spite of their style) is the incredible boldness with
which they look the truth straight in the face. To look facts straight in the
face is only possible to Russians of this generation. No, in Europe they are
not yet so bold; it is a realm of stone, there there is still something to lean
upon. So far as I see and am able to judge, the whole essence of the Russian
revolutionary idea lies in the negation of honour. I like its being so boldly
and fearlessly expressed. No, in Europe they wouldn't understand it yet, but
that's just what we shall clutch at. For a Russian a sense of honour is only a
superfluous burden, and it always has been a burden through all his history.
The open 'right to dishonour' will attract him more than anything. I belong to
the older generation and, I must confess, still cling to honour, but only from
habit. It is only that I prefer the old forms, granted it's from timidity; you
see one must live somehow what's left of one's life."

He suddenly stopped.

"I am talking," he thought, "while he holds his tongue and watches me. He has
come to make me ask him a direct question. And I shall ask him."

"Yulia Mihailovna asked me by some stratagem to find out from you what the
surprise is that you are preparing for the ball to-morrow," Pyotr Stepanovitch
asked suddenly.

"Yes, there really will be a surprise and I certainly shall astonish..." said
Karmazinov with increased dignity. "But I won't tell you what the secret is."

Pyotr Stepanovitch did not insist.

"There is a young man here called Shatov," observed the great writer. "Would
you believe it, I haven't seen him."

"A very nice person. What about him?"

"Oh, nothing. He talks about something. Isn't he the person who gave Stavrogin
that slap in the face?"

"Yes."

"And what's your opinion of Stavrogin?"

"I don't know; he is such a flirt."

Karmazinov detested Stavrogin because it was the latter's habit not to take any
notice of him.

"That flirt," he said, chuckling, "if what is advocated in your manifestoes
ever comes to pass, will be the first to be hanged."

"Perhaps before," Pyotr Stepanovitch said suddenly.

"Quite right too," Karmazinov assented, not laughing, and with pronounced
gravity.

"You have said so once before, and, do you know, I repeated it to him."

"What, you surely didn't repeat it?" Karmazinov laughed again.

"He said that if he were to be hanged it would be enough for you to be flogged,
not simply as a complement but to hurt, as they flog the peasants."

Pyotr Stepanovitch took his hat and got up from his seat. Karmazinov held out
both hands to him at parting.

"And what if all that you are... plotting for is destined to come to pass..."
he piped suddenly, in a honeyed voice with a peculiar intonation, still holding
his hands in his. "How soon could it come about?"

"How could I tell?" Pyotr Stepanovitch answered rather roughly. They looked
intently into each other's eyes.

"At a guess? Approximately?" Karmazinov piped still more sweetly.

"You'll have time to sell your estate and time to clear out too," Pyotr
Stepanovitch muttered still more roughly. They looked at one another even more
intently.

There was a minute of silence.

"It will begin early next May and will be over by October," Pyotr Stepanovitch
said suddenly.

"I thank you sincerely," Karmazinov pronounced in a voice saturated with
feeling, pressing his hands.

"You will have time to get out of the ship, you rat," Pyotr Stepanovitch was
thinking as he went out into the street. "Well, if that 'imperial intellect'
inquires so confidently of the day and the hour and thanks me so respectfully
for the information I have given, we mustn't doubt of ourselves. [He grinned.]
H'm! But he really isn't stupid... and he is simply a rat escaping; men like
that don't tell tales!"

He ran to Filipov's house in Bogoyavlensky Street.

