# PART III - CHAPTER II. THE END OF THE FETE - II
[Metadata]: # {03.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.02.02}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER II. THE END OF THE FETE
II
# II
There I was the witness of a revolting scene: the poor woman was deceived to
her face, and I could do nothing. Indeed, what could I say to her? I had had
time to reconsider things a little and reflect that I had nothing to go upon
but certain feelings and suspicious presentiments. I found her in tears, almost
in hysterics, with compresses of eau-de-Cologne and a glass of water. Before
her stood Pyotr Stepanovitch, who talked without stopping, and the prince, who
held his tongue as though it had been under a lock. With tears and lamentations
she reproached Pyotr Stepanovitch for his "desertion." I was struck at once by
the fact that she ascribed the whole failure, the whole ignominy of the
matinée, everything in fact, to Pyotr Stepanovitch's absence.

In him I observed an important change: he seemed a shade too anxious, almost
serious. As a rule he never seemed serious; he was always laughing, even when
he was angry, and he was often angry. Oh, he was angry now! He was speaking
coarsely, carelessly, with vexation and impatience. He said that he had been
taken ill at Gaganov's lodging, where he had happened to go early in the
morning. Alas, the poor woman was so anxious to be deceived again! The chief
question which I found being discussed was whether the ball, that is, the whole
second half of the fête, should or should not take place. Yulia Mihailovna
could not be induced to appear at the ball "after the insults she had received
that morning"; in other words, her heart was set on being compelled to do so,
and by him, by Pyotr Stepanovitch. She looked upon him as an oracle, and I
believe if he had gone away she would have taken to her bed at once. But he did
not want to go away; he was desperately anxious that the ball should take place
and that Yulia Mihailovna should be present at it.

"Come, what is there to cry about? Are you set on having a scene? On venting
your anger on somebody? Well, vent it on me; only make haste about it, for the
time is passing and you must make up your mind. We made a mess of it with the
matinée; we'll pick up on the ball. Here, the prince thinks as I do. Yes, if it
hadn't been for the prince, how would things have ended there?"

The prince had been at first opposed to the ball (that is, opposed to Yulia
Mihailovna's appearing at it; the ball was bound to go on in any case), but
after two or three such references to his opinion he began little by little to
grunt his acquiescence.

I was surprised too at the extraordinary rudeness of Pyotr Stepanovitch's tone.
Oh, I scout with indignation the contemptible slander which was spread later of
some supposed liaison between Yulia Mihailovna and Pyotr Stepanovitch. There
was no such thing, nor could there be. He gained his ascendency over her from
the first only by encouraging her in her dreams of influence in society and in
the ministry, by entering into her plans, by inventing them for her, and
working upon her with the grossest flattery. He had got her completely into his
toils and had become as necessary to her as the air she breathed. Seeing me,
she cried, with flashing eyes:

"Here, ask him. He kept by my side all the while, just like the prince did.
Tell me, isn't it plain that it was all a preconcerted plot, a base, designing
plot to damage Andrey Antonovitch and me as much as possible? Oh, they had
arranged it beforehand. They had a plan! It's a party, a regular party."

"You are exaggerating as usual. You've always some romantic notion in your
head. But I am glad to see Mr...." (He pretended to have forgotten my name.)
"He'll give us his opinion."

"My opinion," I hastened to put in, "is the same as Yulia Mihailovna's. The
plot is only too evident. I have brought you these ribbons, Yulia Mihailovna.
Whether the ball is to take place or not is not my business, for it's not in my
power to decide; but my part as steward is over. Forgive my warmth, but I can't
act against the dictates of common sense and my own convictions."

"You hear! You hear!" She clasped her hands.

"I hear, and I tell you this." He turned to me. "I think you must have eaten
something which has made you all delirious. To my thinking, nothing has
happened, absolutely nothing but what has happened before and is always liable
to happen in this town. A plot, indeed! It was an ugly failure, disgracefully
stupid. But where's the plot? A plot against Yulia Mihailovna, who has spoiled
them and protected them and fondly forgiven them all their schoolboy pranks!
Yulia Mihailovna! What have I been hammering into you for the last month
continually? What did I warn you? What did you want with all these people--what
did you want with them? What induced you to mix yourself up with these fellows?
What was the motive, what was the object of it? To unite society? But, mercy on
us! will they ever be united?"

"When did you warn me? On the contrary, you approved of it, you even insisted
on it.... I confess I am so surprised.... You brought all sorts of strange
people to see me yourself."

"On the contrary, I opposed you; I did not approve of it. As for bringing them
to see you, I certainly did, but only after they'd got in by dozens and only of
late to make up 'the literary quadrille'--we couldn't get on without these
rogues. Only I don't mind betting that a dozen or two more of the same sort
were let in without tickets to-day."

"Not a doubt of it," I agreed.

"There, you see, you are agreeing already. Think what the tone has been lately
here--I mean in this wretched town. It's nothing but insolence, impudence; it's
been a crying scandal all the time. And who's been encouraging it? Who's
screened it by her authority? Who's upset them all? Who has made all the small
fry huffy? All their family secrets are caricatured in your album. Didn't you
pat them on the back, your poets and caricaturists? Didn't you let Lyamshin
kiss your hand? Didn't a divinity student abuse an actual state councillor in
your presence and spoil his daughter's dress with his tarred boots? Now, can
you wonder that the public is set against you?"

"But that's all your doing, yours! Oh, my goodness!"

"No, I warned you. We quarrelled. Do you hear, we quarrelled?"

"Why, you are lying to my face!"

"Of course it's easy for you to say that. You need a victim to vent your wrath
on. Well, vent it on me as I've said already. I'd better appeal to you, Mr...."
(He was still unable to recall my name.) "We'll reckon on our fingers. I
maintain that, apart from Liputin, there was nothing preconcerted, nothing! I
will prove it, but first let us analyse Liputin. He came forward with that fool
Lebyadkin's verses. Do you maintain that that was a plot? But do you know it
might simply have struck Liputin as a clever thing to do. Seriously, seriously.
He simply came forward with the idea of making every one laugh and entertaining
them--his protectress Yulia Mihailovna first of all. That was all. Don't you
believe it? Isn't that in keeping with all that has been going on here for the
last month? Do you want me to tell the whole truth? I declare that under other
circumstances it might have gone off all right. It was a coarse joke--well, a
bit strong, perhaps; but it was amusing, you know, wasn't it?"

"What! You think what Liputin did was clever?" Yulia Mihailovna cried in
intense indignation. "Such stupidity, such tactlessness, so contemptible, so
mean! It was intentional! Oh, you are saying it on purpose! I believe after
that you are in the plot with them yourself."

"Of course I was behind the scenes, I was in hiding, I set it all going. But if
I were in the plot--understand that, anyway--it wouldn't have ended with
Liputin. So according to you I had arranged with my papa too that he should
cause such a scene on purpose? Well, whose fault is it that my papa was allowed
to read? Who tried only yesterday to prevent you from allowing it, only
yesterday?"

"_Oh, hier il avait tant d'esprit,_ I was so reckoning on him; and then he has
such manners. I thought with him and Karmazinov... Only think!"

"Yes, only think. But in spite of _tant d'esprit_ papa has made things worse,
and if I'd known beforehand that he'd make such a mess of it, I should
certainly not have persuaded you yesterday to keep the goat out of the kitchen
garden, should I--since I am taking part in this conspiracy against your fête
that you are so positive about? And yet I did try to dissuade you yesterday; I
tried to because I foresaw it. To foresee everything was, of course,
impossible; he probably did not know himself a minute before what he would fire
off--these nervous old men can't be reckoned on like other people. But you can
still save the situation: to satisfy the public, send to him to-morrow by
administrative order, and with all the ceremonies, two doctors to inquire into
his health. Even to-day, in fact, and take him straight to the hospital and
apply cold compresses. Every one would laugh, anyway, and see that there was
nothing to take offence at. I'll tell people about it in the evening at the
ball, as I am his son. Karmazinov is another story. He was a perfect ass and
dragged out his article for a whole hour. He certainly must have been in the
plot with me! 'I'll make a mess of it too,' he thought, 'to damage Yulia
Mihailovna.'"

"Oh, Karmazinov! _Quelle honte!_ I was burning, burning with shame for his
audience!"

"Well, I shouldn't have burnt, but have cooked him instead. The audience was
right, you know. Who was to blame for Karmazinov, again? Did I foist him upon
you? Was I one of his worshippers? Well, hang him! But the third maniac, the
political--that's a different matter. That was every one's blunder, not only my
plot."

"Ah, don't speak of it! That was awful, awful! That was my fault, entirely my
fault!"

"Of course it was, but I don't blame you for that. No one can control them,
these candid souls! You can't always be safe from them, even in Petersburg. He
was recommended to you, and in what terms too! So you will admit that you are
bound to appear at the ball to-night. It's an important business. It was you
put him on to the platform. You must make it plain now to the public that you
are not in league with him, that the fellow is in the hands of the police, and
that you were in some inexplicable way deceived. You ought to declare with
indignation that you were the victim of a madman. Because he is a madman and
nothing more. That's how you must put it about him. I can't endure these people
who bite. I say worse things perhaps, but not from the platform, you know. And
they are talking about a senator too."

"What senator? Who's talking?"

"I don't understand it myself, you know. Do you know anything about a senator,
Yulia Mihailovna?"

"A senator?"

"You see, they are convinced that a senator has been appointed to be governor
here, and that you are being superseded from Petersburg. I've heard it from
lots of people."

"I've heard it too," I put in.

"Who said so?" asked Yulia Mihailovna, flushing all over.

"You mean, who said so first? How can I tell? But there it is, people say so.
Masses of people are saying so. They were saying so yesterday particularly.
They are all very serious about it, though I can't make it out. Of course the
more intelligent and competent don't talk, but even some of those listen."

"How mean! And... how stupid!"

"Well, that's just why you must make your appearance, to show these fools."

"I confess I feel myself that it's my duty, but... what if there's another
disgrace in store for us? What if people don't come? No one will come, you
know, no one!"

"How hot you are! They not come! What about the new clothes? What about the
girls' dresses? I give you up as a woman after that! Is that your knowledge of
human nature?"

"The marshal's wife won't come, she won't."

"But, after all, what has happened? Why won't they come?" he cried at last with
angry impatience.

"Ignominy, disgrace--that's what's happened. I don't know what to call it, but
after it I can't face people."

"Why? How are you to blame for it, after all? Why do you take the blame of it
on yourself? Isn't it rather the fault of the audience, of your respectable
residents, your patresfamilias? They ought to have controlled the roughs and
the rowdies--for it was all the work of roughs and rowdies, nothing serious.
You can never manage things with the police alone in any society, anywhere.
Among us every one asks for a special policeman to protect him wherever he
goes. People don't understand that society must protect itself. And what do our
patresfamilias, the officials, the wives and daughters, do in such cases? They
sit quiet and sulk. In fact there's not enough social initiative to keep the
disorderly in check."

"Ah, that's the simple truth! They sit quiet, sulk and... gaze about them."

"And if it's the truth, you ought to say so aloud, proudly, sternly, just to
show that you are not defeated, to those respectable residents and mothers of
families. Oh, you can do it; you have the gift when your head is clear. You
will gather them round you and say it aloud. And then a paragraph in the
_Voice_ and the _Financial News._ Wait a bit, I'll undertake it myself, I'll
arrange it all for you. Of course there must be more superintendence: you must
look after the buffet; you must ask the prince, you must ask Mr.... You must
not desert us, monsieur, just when we have to begin all over again. And
finally, you must appear arm-in-arm with Andrey Antonovitch.... How is Andrey
Antonovitch?"

"Oh, how unjustly, how untruly, how cruelly you have always judged that angelic
man!" Yulia Mihailovna cried in a sudden, outburst, almost with tears, putting
her handkerchief to her eyes.

Pyotr Stepanovitch was positively taken aback for the moment. "Good heavens!
I.... What have I said? I've always..."

"You never have, never! You have never done him justice."

"There's no understanding a woman," grumbled Pyotr Stepanovitch, with a wry
smile.

"He is the most sincere, the most delicate, the most angelic of men! The most
kind-hearted of men!"

"Well, really, as for kind-heartedness... I've always done him justice...."

"Never! But let us drop it. I am too awkward in my defence of him. This morning
that little Jesuit, the marshal's wife, also dropped some sarcastic hints about
what happened yesterday."

"Oh, she has no thoughts to spare for yesterday now, she is full of to-day. And
why are you so upset at her not coming to the ball to-night? Of course, she
won't come after getting mixed up in such a scandal. Perhaps it's not her
fault, but still her reputation... her hands are soiled."

"What do you mean; I don't understand? Why are her hands soiled?" Yulia
Mihailovna looked at him in perplexity.

"I don't vouch for the truth of it, but the town is ringing with the story that
it was she brought them together."

"What do you mean? Brought whom together?"

"What, do you mean to say you don't know?" he exclaimed with well-simulated
wonder.  "Why Stavrogin and Lizaveta Nikolaevna."

"What? How?" we all cried out at once.

"Is it possible you don't know? Phew! Why, it is quite a tragic romance:
Lizaveta Nikolaevna was pleased to get out of that lady's carriage and get
straight into Stavrogin's carriage, and slipped off with 'the latter' to
Skvoreshniki in full daylight. Only an hour ago, hardly an hour."

We were flabbergasted. Of course we fell to questioning him, but to our wonder,
although he "happened" to be a witness of the scene himself, he could give us
no detailed account of it. The thing seemed to have happened like this: when
the marshal's wife was driving Liza and Mavriky Nikolaevitch from the matinée
to the house of Praskovya Ivanovna (whose legs were still bad) they saw a
carriage waiting a short distance, about twenty-five paces, to one side of the
front door. When Liza jumped out, she ran straight to this carriage; the door
was flung open and shut again; Liza called to Mavriky Nikolaevitch, "Spare me,"
and the carriage drove off at full speed to Skvoreshniki. To our hurried
questions whether it was by arrangement? Who was in the carriage? Pyotr
Stepanovitch answered that he knew nothing about it; no doubt it had been
arranged, but that he did not see Stavrogin himself; possibly the old butler,
Alexey Yegorytch, might have been in the carriage. To the question "How did he
come to be there, and how did he know for a fact that she had driven to
Skvoreshniki?" he answered that he happened to be passing and, at seeing Liza,
he had run up to the carriage (and yet he could not make out who was in it, an
inquisitive man like him!) and that Mavriky Nikolaevitch, far from setting off
in pursuit, had not even tried to stop Liza, and had even laid a restraining
hand on the marshal's wife, who was shouting at the top of her voice: "She is
going to Stavrogin, to Stavrogin." At this point I lost patience, and cried
furiously to Pyotr Stepanovitch:

"It's all your doing, you rascal! This was what you were doing this morning.
You helped Stavrogin, you came in the carriage, you helped her into it... it
was you, you, you! Yulia Mihailovna, he is your enemy; he will be your ruin
too! Beware of him!"

And I ran headlong out of the house. I wonder myself and cannot make out to
this day how I came to say that to him. But I guessed quite right: it had all
happened almost exactly as I said, as appeared later. What struck me most was
the obviously artificial way in which he broke the news. He had not told it at
once on entering the house as an extraordinary piece of news, but pretended
that we knew without his telling us which was impossible in so short a time.
And if we had known it, we could not possibly have refrained from mentioning it
till he introduced the subject. Besides, he could not have heard yet that the
town was "ringing with gossip" about the marshal's wife in so short a time.
Besides, he had once or twice given a vulgar, frivolous smile as he told the
story, probably considering that we were fools and completely taken in.

But I had no thought to spare for him; the central fact I believed, and ran
from Yulia Mihailovna's, beside myself. The catastrophe cut me to the heart. I
was wounded almost to tears; perhaps I did shed some indeed. I was at a
complete loss what to do. I rushed to Stepan Trofimovitch's, but the vexatious
man still refused to open the door. Nastasya informed me, in a reverent
whisper, that he had gone to bed, but I did not believe it. At Liza's house I
succeeded in questioning the servants. They confirmed the story of the
elopement, but knew nothing themselves. There was great commotion in the house;
their mistress had been attacked by fainting fits, and Mavriky Nikolaevitch was
with her. I did not feel it possible to ask for Mavriky Nikolaevitch. To my
inquiries about Pyotr Stepanovitch they told me that he had been in and out
continually of late, sometimes twice in the day. The servants were sad, and
showed particular respectfulness in speaking of Liza; they were fond of her.
That she was ruined, utterly ruined, I did not doubt; but the psychological
aspect of the matter I was utterly unable to understand, especially after her
scene with Stavrogin the previous day. To run about the town and inquire at the
houses of acquaintances, who would, of course, by now have heard the news and
be rejoicing at it, seemed to me revolting, besides being humiliating for Liza.
But, strange to say, I ran to see Darya Pavlovna, though I was not admitted (no
one had been admitted into the house since the previous morning). I don't know
what I could have said to her and what made me run to her. From her I went to
her brother's. Shatov listened sullenly and in silence. I may observe that I
found him more gloomy than I had ever seen him before; he was awfully
preoccupied and seemed only to listen to me with an effort. He said scarcely
anything and began walking up and down his cell from corner to corner, treading
more noisily than usual. As I was going down the stairs he shouted after me to
go to Liputin's: "There you'll hear everything." Yet I did not go to Liputin's,
but after I'd gone a good way towards home I turned back to Shatov's again,
and, half opening the door without going in, suggested to him laconically and
with no kind of explanation, "Won't you go to Marya Timofyevna to-day?" At this
Shatov swore at me, and I went away. I note here that I may not forget it that
he did purposely go that evening to the other end of the town to see Marya
Timofyevna, whom he had not seen for some time. He found her in excellent
health and spirits and Lebyadkin dead drunk, asleep on the sofa in the first
room. This was at nine o'clock. He told me so himself next day when we met for
a moment in the street. Before ten o'clock I made up my mind to go to the ball,
but not in the capacity of a steward (besides my rosette had been left at Yulia
Mihailovna's). I was tempted by irresistible curiosity to listen, without
asking any questions, to what people were saying in the town about all that had
happened. I wanted, too, to have a look at Yulia Mihailovna, if only at a
distance. I reproached myself greatly that I had left her so abruptly that
afternoon.

