# PART I - CHAPTER IV. THE CRIPPLE - III
[Metadata]: # {01.04.03}
[Descriptor]: # {01.04.03}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER IV. THE CRIPPLE
III
# III
He certainly was queer, but in all this there was a very great deal not clear
to me. There was something underlying it all. I simply did not believe in this
publication; then that stupid letter, in which there was an offer, only too
barefaced, to give information and produce "documents," though they were all
silent about that, and talked of something quite different; finally that
printing-press and Shatov's sudden exit, just because they spoke of a
printing-press. All this led me to imagine that something had happened before I
came in of which I knew nothing; and, consequently, that it was no business of
mine and that I was in the way. And, indeed, it was time to take leave, I had
stayed long enough for the first call. I went up to say good-bye to Lizaveta
Nikolaevna.

She seemed to have forgotten that I was in the room, and was still standing in
the same place by the table with her head bowed, plunged in thought, gazing
fixedly at one spot on the carpet.

"Ah, you, too, are going, good-bye," she murmured in an ordinary friendly tone.
"Give my greetings to Stepan Trofimovitch, and persuade him to come and see me
as soon as he can. Mavriky Nikolaevitch, Anton Lavrentyevitch is going. Excuse
maman's not being able to come out and say good-bye to you...."

I went out and had reached the bottom of the stairs when a footman suddenly
overtook me at the street door.

"My lady begs you to come back...."

"The mistress, or Lizaveta Nikolaevna?"

"The young lady."

I found Liza not in the big room where we had been sitting, but in the
reception-room next to it. The door between it and the drawing-room, where
Mavriky Nikolaevitch was left alone, was closed.

Liza smiled to me but was pale. She was standing in the middle of the room in
evident indecision, visibly struggling with herself; but she suddenly took me
by the hand, and led me quickly to the window.

"I want to see _her_ at once," she whispered, bending upon me a burning,
passionate, impatient glance, which would not admit a hint of opposition. "I
must see her with my own eyes, and I beg you to help me."

She was in a perfect frenzy, and--in despair.

"Who is it you want to see, Lizaveta Nikolaevna?" I inquired in dismay.

"That Lebyadkin's sister, that lame girl.... Is it true that she's lame?"

I was astounded.

"I have never seen her, but I've heard that she's lame. I heard it yesterday,"
I said with hurried readiness, and also in a whisper.

"I must see her, absolutely. Could you arrange it to-day?"

I felt dreadfully sorry for her.

"That's utterly impossible, and, besides, I should not know at all how to set
about it," I began persuading her. "I'll go to Shatov...."

"If you don't arrange it by to-morrow I'll go to her by myself, alone, for
Mavriky Nikolaevitch has refused. I rest all my hopes on you and I've no one
else; I spoke stupidly to Shatov.... I'm sure that you are perfectly honest and
perhaps ready to do anything for me, only arrange it."

I felt a passionate desire to help her in every way.

"This is what I'll do," I said, after a moment's thought. "I'll go myself
to-day and will see her for sure, for sure. I will manage so as to see her. I
give you my word of honour. Only let me confide in Shatov."

"Tell him that I do desire it, and that I can't wait any longer, but that I
wasn't deceiving him just now. He went away perhaps because he's very honest
and he didn't like my seeming to deceive him. I wasn't deceiving him, I really
do want to edit books and found a printing-press...."

"He is honest, very honest," I assented warmly.

"If it's not arranged by to-morrow, though, I shall go myself whatever happens,
and even if every one were to know."

"I can't be with you before three o'clock to-morrow," I observed, after a
moment's deliberation.

"At three o'clock then. Then it was true what I imagined yesterday at Stepan
Trofimovitch's, that you--are rather devoted to me?" she said with a smile,
hurriedly pressing my hand to say good-bye, and hurrying back to the forsaken
Mavriky Nikolaevitch.

I went out weighed down by my promise, and unable to understand what had
happened. I had seen a woman in real despair, not hesitating to compromise
herself by confiding in a man she hardly knew. Her womanly smile at a moment so
terrible for her and her hint that she had noticed my feelings the day before
sent a pang to my heart; but I felt sorry for her, very sorry--that was all!
Her secrets became at once something sacred for me, and if anyone had begun to
reveal them to me now, I think I should have covered my ears, and should have
refused to hear anything more. I only had a presentiment of something... yet I
was utterly at a loss to see how I could do anything. What's more I did not
even yet understand exactly what I had to arrange; an interview, but what sort
of an interview? And how could I bring them together? My only hope was Shatov,
though I could be sure that he wouldn't help me in any way. But all the same, I
hurried to him.

