# PART II - CHAPTER III. THE DUEL - II
[Metadata]: # {02.03.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.03.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {02.03.02.01}
I have hitherto not had occasion to describe his appearance. He was a tall man
of thirty-three, and well fed, as the common folk express it, almost fat, with
lank flaxen hair, and with features which might be called handsome. He had
retired from the service with the rank of colonel, and if he had served till he
reached the rank of general he would have been even more impressive in that
position, and would very likely have become an excellent fighting general.

I must add, as characteristic of the man, that the chief cause of his leaving
the army was the thought of the family disgrace which had haunted him so
painfully since the insult paid to his father by Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch four
years before at the club. He conscientiously considered it dishonourable to
remain in the service, and was inwardly persuaded that he was contaminating the
regiment and his companions, although they knew nothing of the incident. It's
true that he had once before been disposed to leave the army long before the
insult to his father, and on quite other grounds, but he had hesitated. Strange
as it is to write, the original design, or rather desire, to leave the army was
due to the proclamation of the 19th of February of the emancipation of the
serfs. Gaganov, who was one of the richest landowners in the province, and who
had not lost very much by the emancipation, and was, moreover, quite capable of
understanding the humanity of the reform and its economic advantages, suddenly
felt himself personally insulted by the proclamation. It was something
unconscious, a feeling; but was all the stronger for being unrecognised. He
could not bring himself, however, to take any decisive step till his father's
death. But he began to be well known for his "gentlemanly" ideas to many
persons of high position in Petersburg, with whom he strenuously kept up
connections. He was secretive and self-contained. Another characteristic: he
belonged to that strange section of the nobility, still surviving in Russia,
who set an extreme value on their pure and ancient lineage, and take it too
seriously. At the same time he could not endure Russian history, and, indeed,
looked upon Russian customs in general as more or less piggish. Even in his
childhood, in the special military school for the sons of particularly wealthy
and distinguished families in which he had the privilege of being educated,
from first to last certain poetic notions were deeply rooted in his mind. He
loved castles, chivalry; all the theatrical part of it. He was ready to cry
with shame that in the days of the Moscow Tsars the sovereign had the right to
inflict corporal punishment on the Russian boyars, and blushed at the contrast.
This stiff and extremely severe man, who had a remarkable knowledge of military
science and performed his duties admirably, was at heart a dreamer. It was said
that he could speak at meetings and had the gift of language, but at no time
during the thirty-three years of his life had he spoken. Even in the
distinguished circles in Petersburg, in which he had moved of late, he behaved
with extraordinary haughtiness. His meeting in Petersburg with Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, who had just returned from abroad, almost sent him out of his
mind. At the present moment, standing at the barrier, he was terribly uneasy.
He kept imagining that the duel would somehow not come off; the least delay
threw him into a tremor. There was an expression of anguish in his face when
Kirillov, instead of giving the signal for them to fire, began suddenly
speaking, only for form, indeed, as he himself explained aloud.

"Simply as a formality, now that you have the pistols in your hands, and I must
give the signal, I ask you for the last time, will you not be reconciled? It's
the duty of a second."

As though to spite him, Mavriky Nikolaevitch, who had till then kept silence,
although he had been reproaching himself all day for his compliance and
acquiescence, suddenly caught up Kirillov's thought and began to speak:

"I entirely agree with Mr. Kirillov's words.... This idea that reconciliation
is impossible at the barrier is a prejudice, only suitable for Frenchmen.
Besides, with your leave, I don't understand what the offence is. I've been
wanting to say so for a long time... because every apology is offered, isn't
it?"

He flushed all over. He had rarely spoken so much, and with such excitement.

"I repeat again my offer to make every possible apology," Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch interposed hurriedly.

"This is impossible," shouted Gaganov furiously, addressing Mavriky
Nikolaevitch, and stamping with rage. "Explain to this man," he pointed with
his pistol at Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, "if you're my second and not my enemy,
Mavriky Nikolaevitch, that such overtures only aggravate the insult. He feels
it impossible to be insulted by me!... He feels it no disgrace to walk away
from me at the barrier! What does he take me for, after that, do you think?...
And you, you, my second, too! You're simply irritating me that I may miss."

He stamped again. There were flecks of foam on his lips.

"Negotiations are over. I beg you to listen to the signal!" Kirillov shouted at
the top of his voice. "One! Two! Three!"

At the word "Three" the combatants took aim at one another. Gaganov at once
raised his pistol, and at the fifth or sixth step he fired. For a second he
stood still, and, making sure that he had missed, advanced to the barrier.
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch advanced too, raising his pistol, but somehow holding
it very high, and fired, almost without taking aim. Then he took out his
handkerchief and bound it round the little finger of his right hand. Only then
they saw that Gaganov had not missed him completely, but the bullet had only
grazed the fleshy part of his finger without touching the bone; it was only a
slight scratch. Kirillov at once announced that the duel would go on, unless
the combatants were satisfied.

"I declare," said Gaganov hoarsely (his throat felt parched), again addressing
Mavriky Nikolaevitch, "that this man," again he pointed in Stavrogin's
direction, "fired in the air on purpose... intentionally.... This is an insult
again.... He wants to make the duel impossible!"

"I have the right to fire as I like so long as I keep the rules," Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch asserted resolutely.

"No, he hasn't! Explain it to him! Explain it!" cried Gaganov.

"I'm in complete agreement with Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch," proclaimed Kirillov.

"Why does he spare me?" Gaganov raged, not hearing him. "I despise his
mercy.... I spit on it.... I..."

"I give you my word that I did not intend to insult you," cried Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch impatiently. "I shot high because I don't want to kill anyone
else, either you or anyone else. It's nothing to do with you personally. It's
true that I don't consider myself insulted, and I'm sorry that angers you. But
I don't allow any one to interfere with my rights."

"If he's so afraid of bloodshed, ask him why he challenged me," yelled Gaganov,
still addressing Mavriky Nikolaevitch.

"How could he help challenging you?" said Kirillov, intervening. "You wouldn't
listen to anything. How was one to get rid of you?"

"I'll only mention one thing," observed Mavriky Nikolaevitch, pondering the
matter with painful effort. "If a combatant declares beforehand that he will
fire in the air the duel certainly cannot go on... for obvious and... delicate
reasons."

"I haven't declared that I'll fire in the air every time," cried Stavrogin,
losing all patience. "You don't know what's in my mind or how I intend to fire
again.... I'm not restricting the duel at all."

"In that case the encounter can go on," said Mavriky Nikolaevitch to Gaganov.

"Gentlemen, take your places," Kirillov commanded. Again they advanced, again
Gaganov missed and Stavrogin fired into the air. There might have been a
dispute as to his firing into the air. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch might have
flatly declared that he'd fired properly, if he had not admitted that he had
missed intentionally. He did not aim straight at the sky or at the trees, but
seemed to aim at his adversary, though as he pointed the pistol the bullet flew
a yard above his hat. The second time the shot was even lower, even less like
an intentional miss. Nothing would have convinced Gaganov now.

"Again!" he muttered, grinding his teeth. "No matter! I've been challenged and
I'll make use of my rights. I'll fire a third time... whatever happens."

"You have full right to do so," Kirillov rapped out. Mavriky Nikolaevitch said
nothing. The opponents were placed a third time, the signal was given. This
time Gaganov went right up to the barrier, and began from there taking aim, at
a distance of twelve paces. His hand was trembling too much to take good aim.
Stavrogin stood with his pistol lowered and awaited his shot without moving.

"Too long; you've been aiming too long!" Kirillov shouted impetuously. "Fire!
Fire!"

But the shot rang out, and this time Stavrogin's white beaver hat flew off. The
aim had been fairly correct. The crown of the hat was pierced very low down; a
quarter of an inch lower and all would have been over. Kirillov picked up the
hat and handed it to Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch.

"Fire; don't detain your adversary!" cried Mavriky Nikolaevitch in extreme
agitation, seeing that Stavrogin seemed to have forgotten to fire, and was
examining the hat with Kirillov. Stavrogin started, looked at Gaganov, turned
round and this time, without the slightest regard for punctilio, fired to one
side, into the copse. The duel was over. Gaganov stood as though overwhelmed.
Mavriky Nikolaevitch went up and began saying something to him, but he did not
seem to understand. Kirillov took off his hat as he went away, and nodded to
Mavriky Nikolaevitch. But Stavrogin forgot his former politeness. When he had
shot into the copse he did not even turn towards the barrier. He handed his
pistol to Kirillov and hastened towards the horses. His face looked angry; he
did not speak. Kirillov, too, was silent. They got on their horses and set off
at a gallop.

