# PART I - CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING. - VII
[Metadata]: # {01.02.07}
[Descriptor]: # {01.02.07}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART I
CHAPTER II. PRINCE HARRY. MATCHMAKING.
VII
# VII
It was true that she would never have let Dasha suffer; on the contrary, she
considered now that she was acting as her benefactress. The most generous and
legitimate indignation was glowing in her soul, when, as she put on her shawl,
she caught fixed upon her the embarrassed and mistrustful eyes of her protégée.
She had genuinely loved the girl from her childhood upwards. Praskovya Ivanovna
had with justice called Darya Pavlovna her favourite. Long ago Varvara Petrovna
had made up her mind once for all that "Darya's disposition was not like her
brother's" (not, that is, like Ivan Shatov's), that she was quiet and gentle,
and capable of great self-sacrifice; that she was distinguished by a power of
devotion, unusual modesty, rare reasonableness, and, above all, by gratitude.
Till that time Dasha had, to all appearances, completely justified her
expectations.

"In that life there will be no mistakes," said Varvara Petrovna when the girl
was only twelve years old, and as it was characteristic of her to attach
herself doggedly and passionately to any dream that fascinated her, any new
design, any idea that struck her as noble, she made up her mind at once to
educate Dasha as though she were her own daughter. She at once set aside a sum
of money for her, and sent for a governess, Miss Criggs, who lived with them
until the girl was sixteen, but she was for some reason suddenly dismissed.
Teachers came for her from the High School, among them a real Frenchman, who
taught Dasha French. He, too, was suddenly dismissed, almost turned out of the
house. A poor lady, a widow of good family, taught her to play the piano. Yet
her chief tutor was Stepan Trofimovitch.

In reality he first discovered Dasha. He began teaching the quiet child even
before Varvara Petrovna had begun to think about her. I repeat again, it was
wonderful how children took to him. Lizaveta Nikolaevna Tushin had been taught
by him from the age of eight till eleven (Stepan Trofimovitch took no fees, of
course, for his lessons, and would not on any account have taken payment from
the Drozdovs). But he fell in love with the charming child and used to tell her
poems of a sort about the creation of the world, about the earth, and the
history of humanity. His lectures about the primitive peoples and primitive man
were more interesting than the Arabian Nights. Liza, who was ecstatic over
these stories, used to mimic Stepan Trofimovitch very funnily at home. He heard
of this and once peeped in on her unawares. Liza, overcome with confusion,
flung herself into his arms and shed tears; Stepan Trofimovitch wept too with
delight. But Liza soon after went away, and only Dasha was left. When Dasha
began to have other teachers, Stepan Trofimovitch gave up his lessons with her,
and by degrees left off noticing her. Things went on like this for a long time.
Once when she was seventeen he was struck by her prettiness. It happened at
Varvara Petrovna's table. He began to talk to the young girl, was much pleased
with her answers, and ended by offering to give her a serious and comprehensive
course of lessons on the history of Russian literature. Varvara Petrovna
approved, and thanked him for his excellent idea, and Dasha was delighted.
Stepan Trofimovitch proceeded to make special preparations for the lectures,
and at last they began. They began with the most ancient period. The first
lecture went off enchantingly. Varvara Petrovna was present. When Stepan
Trofimovitch had finished, and as he was going informed his pupil that the next
time he would deal with "The Story of the Expedition of Igor," Varvara Petrovna
suddenly got up and announced that there would be no more lessons. Stepan
Trofimovitch winced, but said nothing, and Dasha flushed crimson. It put a stop
to the scheme, however. This had happened just three years before Varvara
Petrovna's unexpected fancy.

Poor Stepan Trofimovitch was sitting alone free from all misgivings. Plunged in
mournful reveries he had for some time been looking out of the window to see
whether any of his friends were coming. But nobody would come. It was
drizzling. It was turning cold, he would have to have the stove heated. He
sighed. Suddenly a terrible apparition flashed upon his eyes:

Varvara Petrovna in such weather and at such an unexpected hour to see him! And
on foot! He was so astounded that he forgot to put on his coat, and received
her as he was, in his everlasting pink-wadded dressing-jacket.

_"Ma bonne amie!"_ he cried faintly, to greet her. "You're alone; I'm glad; I
can't endure your friends. How you do smoke! Heavens, what an atmosphere! You
haven't finished your morning tea and it's nearly twelve o'clock. It's your
idea of bliss--disorder! You take pleasure in dirt. What's that torn paper on
the floor? Nastasya, Nastasya! What is your Nastasya about? Open the window,
the casement, the doors, fling everything wide open. And we'll go into the
drawing-room. I've come to you on a matter of importance. And you sweep up, my
good woman, for once in your life."

"They make such a muck!" Nastasya whined in a voice of plaintive exasperation.

"Well, you must sweep, sweep it up fifteen times a day! You've a wretched
drawing-room" (when they had gone into the drawing-room). "Shut the door
properly. She'll be listening. You must have it repapered. Didn't I send a
paperhanger to you with patterns? Why didn't you choose one? Sit down, and
listen. Do sit down, I beg you. Where are you off to? Where are you off to?
Where are you off to?"

"I'll be back directly," Stepan Trofimovitch cried from the next room. "Here I
am again."

"Ah,--you've changed your coat." She scanned him mockingly. (He had flung his
coat on over the dressing-jacket.) "Well, certainly that's more suited to our
subject. Do sit down, I entreat you."

She told him everything at once, abruptly and impressively. She hinted at the
eight thousand of which he stood in such terrible need. She told him in detail
of the dowry. Stepan Trofimovitch sat trembling, opening his eyes wider and
wider. He heard it all, but he could not realise it clearly. He tried to speak,
but his voice kept breaking. All he knew was that everything would be as she
said, that to protest and refuse to agree would be useless, and that he was a
married man irrevocably.

_"Mais, ma bonne amie!_...for the third time, and at my age...and to such a
child." He brought out at last, _"Mais, c'est une enfant!"_

"A child who is twenty years old, thank God. Please don't roll your eyes, I
entreat you, you're not on the stage. You're very clever and learned, but you
know nothing at all about life. You will always want a nurse to look after you.
I shall die, and what will become of you? She will be a good nurse to you;
she's a modest girl, strong-willed, reasonable; besides, I shall be here too, I
shan't die directly. She's fond of home, she's an angel of gentleness. This
happy thought came to me in Switzerland. Do you understand if I tell you myself
that she is an angel of gentleness!" she screamed with sudden fury. "Your house
is dirty, she will bring in order, cleanliness. Everything will shine like a
mirror. Good gracious, do you expect me to go on my knees to you with such a
treasure, to enumerate all the advantages, to court you! Why, you ought to be
on your knees.... Oh, you shallow, shallow, faint-hearted man!"

"But... I'm an old man!"

"What do your fifty-three years matter! Fifty is the middle of life, not the
end of it. You are a handsome man and you know it yourself. You know, too, what
a respect she has for you. If I die, what will become of her? But married to
you she'll be at peace, and I shall be at peace. You have renown, a name, a
loving heart. You receive a pension which I look upon as an obligation. You
will save her perhaps, you will save her! In any case you will be doing her an
honour. You will form her for life, you will develop her heart, you will direct
her ideas. How many people come to grief nowadays because their ideas are
wrongly directed. By that time your book will be ready, and you will at once
set people talking about you again."

"I am, in fact," he muttered, at once flattered by Varvara Petrovna's adroit
insinuations. "I was just preparing to sit down to my 'Tales from Spanish
History.'"

"Well, there you are. It's just come right."

"But... she? Have you spoken to her?"

"Don't worry about her. And there's no need for you to be inquisitive. Of
course, you must ask her yourself, entreat her to do you the honour, you
understand? But don't be uneasy. I shall be here. Besides, you love her."

Stepan Trofimovitch felt giddy. The walls were going round. There was one
terrible idea underlying this to which he could not reconcile himself.

_"Excellente amie,"_ his voice quivered suddenly. "I could never have conceived
that you would make up your mind to give me in marriage to another... woman."

"You're not a girl, Stepan Trofimovitch. Only girls are given in marriage. You
are taking a wife," Varvara Petrovna hissed malignantly.

_"Oui, j'ai pris un mot pour un autre. Mais c'est égal."_ He gazed at her with
a hopeless air.

"I see that _c'est égal_," she muttered contemptuously through her teeth. "Good
heavens! Why he's going to faint. Nastasya, Nastasya, water!"

But water was not needed. He came to himself. Varvara Petrovna took up her
umbrella.

"I see it's no use talking to you now...."

_"Oui, oui, je suis incapable."_

"But by to-morrow you'll have rested and thought it over. Stay at home. If
anything happens let me know, even if it's at night. Don't write letters, I
shan't read them. To-morrow I'll come again at this time alone, for a final
answer, and I trust it will be satisfactory. Try to have nobody here and no
untidiness, for the place isn't fit to be seen. Nastasya, Nastasya!"

The next day, of course, he consented, and, indeed, he could do nothing else.
There was one circumstance...

