# PART II - CHAPTER II. NIGHT (continued) - II
[Metadata]: # {02.02.02}
[Descriptor]: # {02.02.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {02.02.02.01}
The house which Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch had reached stood alone in a deserted
lane between fences, beyond which market gardens stretched, at the very end of
the town. It was a very solitary little wooden house, which was only just built
and not yet weather-boarded. In one of the little windows the shutters were not
yet closed, and there was a candle standing on the window-ledge, evidently as a
signal to the late guest who was expected that night. Thirty paces away
Stavrogin made out on the doorstep the figure of a tall man, evidently the
master of the house, who had come out to stare impatiently up the road. He
heard his voice, too, impatient and, as it were, timid.

"Is that you? You?"

"Yes," responded Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but not till he had mounted the steps
and was folding up his umbrella.

"At last, sir." Captain Lebyadkin, for it was he, ran fussily to and fro. "Let
me take your umbrella, please. It's very wet; I'll open it on the floor here,
in the corner. Please walk in. Please walk in."

The door was open from the passage into a room that was lighted by two candles.

"If it had not been for your promise that you would certainly come, I should
have given up expecting you."

"A quarter to one," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, looking at his watch, as he
went into the room.

"And in this rain; and such an interesting distance. I've no clock... and there
are nothing but market-gardens round me... so that you fall behind the times.
Not that I murmur exactly; for I dare not, I dare not, but only because I've
been devoured with impatience all the week... to have things settled at last."

"How so?"

"To hear my fate, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. Please sit down."

He bowed, pointing to a seat by the table, before the sofa.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch looked round. The room was tiny and low-pitched. The
furniture consisted only of the most essential articles, plain wooden chairs
and a sofa, also newly made without covering or cushions. There were two tables
of limewood; one by the sofa, and the other in the corner was covered with a
table-cloth, laid with things over which a clean table-napkin had been thrown.
And, indeed, the whole room was obviously kept extremely clean.

Captain Lebyadkin had not been drunk for eight days. His face looked bloated
and yellow. His eyes looked uneasy, inquisitive, and obviously bewildered. It
was only too evident that he did not know what tone he could adopt, and what
line it would be most advantageous for him to take.

"Here," he indicated his surroundings, "I live like Zossima. Sobriety,
solitude, and poverty--the vow of the knights of old."

"You imagine that the knights of old took such vows?"

"Perhaps I'm mistaken. Alas! I have no culture. I've ruined all. Believe me,
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, here first I have recovered from shameful
propensities--not a glass nor a drop! I have a home, and for six days past I
have experienced a conscience at ease. Even the walls smell of resin and remind
me of nature. And what have I been; what was I?

'At night without a bed I wander      And my tongue put out by day...'

to use the words of a poet of genius. But you're wet through.... Wouldn't you
like some tea?"

"Don't trouble."

"The samovar has been boiling since eight o'clock, but it went out at last like
everything in this world. The sun, too, they say, will go out in its turn. But
if you like I'll get up the samovar. Agafya is not asleep."

"Tell me, Marya Timofyevna..."

"She's here, here," Lebyadkin replied at once, in a whisper. "Would you like to
have a look at her?" He pointed to the closed door to the next room.

"She's not asleep?"

"Oh, no, no. How could she be? On the contrary, she's been expecting you all
the evening, and as soon as she heard you were coming she began making her
toilet."

He was just twisting his mouth into a jocose smile, but he instantly checked
himself.

"How is she, on the whole?" asked Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, frowning.

"On the whole? You know that yourself, sir." He shrugged his shoulders
commiseratingly. "But just now... just now she's telling her fortune with
cards...."

"Very good. Later on. First of all I must finish with you."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch settled himself in a chair. The captain did not venture
to sit down on the sofa, but at once moved up another chair for himself, and
bent forward to listen, in a tremor of expectation.

"What have you got there under the table-cloth?" asked Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch,
suddenly noticing it.

"That?" said Lebyadkin, turning towards it also. "That's from your generosity,
by way of house-warming, so to say; considering also the length of the walk,
and your natural fatigue," he sniggered ingratiatingly. Then he got up on
tiptoe, and respectfully and carefully lifted the table-cloth from the table in
the corner. Under it was seen a slight meal: ham, veal, sardines, cheese, a
little green decanter, and a long bottle of Bordeaux. Everything had been laid
neatly, expertly, and almost daintily.

"Was that your effort?"

"Yes, sir. Ever since yesterday I've done my best, and all to do you honour....
Marya Timofyevna doesn't trouble herself, as you know, on that score. And
what's more its all from your liberality, your own providing, as you're the
master of the house and not I, and I'm only, so to say, your agent. All the
same, all the same, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, all the same, in spirit, I'm
independent! Don't take away from me this last possession!" he finished up
pathetically.

"H'm! You might sit down again."

"Gra-a-teful, grateful, and independent." He sat down. "Ah, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, so much has been fermenting in this heart that I have not
known how to wait for your coming. Now you will decide my fate, and... that
unhappy creature's, and then... shall I pour out all I feel to you as I used to
in old days, four years ago? You deigned to listen to me then, you read my
verses.... They might call me your Falstaff from Shakespeare in those days, but
you meant so much in my life! I have great terrors now, and it's only to you I
look for counsel and light. Pyotr Stepanovitch is treating me abominably!"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch listened with interest, and looked at him attentively.
It was evident that though Captain Lebyadkin had left off drinking he was far
from being in a harmonious state of mind. Drunkards of many years' standing,
like Lebyadkin, often show traces of incoherence, of mental cloudiness, of
something, as it were, damaged, and crazy, though they may deceive, cheat, and
swindle, almost as well as anybody if occasion arises.

"I see that you haven't changed a bit in these four years and more, captain,"
said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, somewhat more amiably. "It seems, in fact, as
though the second half of a man's life is usually made up of nothing but the
habits he has accumulated during the first half."

"Grand words! You solve the riddle of life!" said the captain, half cunningly,
half in genuine and unfeigned admiration, for he was a great lover of words.
"Of all your sayings, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, I remember one thing above all;
you were in Petersburg when you said it: 'One must really be a great man to be
able to make a stand even against common sense.' That was it."

"Yes, and a fool as well."

"A fool as well, maybe. But you've been scattering clever sayings all your
life, while they.... Imagine Liputin, imagine Pyotr Stepanovitch saying
anything like that! Oh, how cruelly Pyotr Stepanovitch has treated me!"

"But how about yourself, captain? What can you say of your behaviour?"

"Drunkenness, and the multitude of my enemies. But now that's all over, all
over, and I have a new skin, like a snake. Do you know, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, I am making my will; in fact, I've made it already?"

"That's interesting. What are you leaving, and to whom?"

"To my fatherland, to humanity, and to the students. Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, I
read in the paper the biography of an American. He left all his vast fortune to
factories and to the exact sciences, and his skeleton to the students of the
academy there, and his skin to be made into a drum, so that the American
national hymn might be beaten upon it day and night. Alas! we are pigmies in
mind compared with the soaring thought of the States of North America. Russia
is the play of nature but not of mind. If I were to try leaving my skin for a
drum, for instance, to the Akmolinsky infantry regiment, in which I had the
honour of beginning my service, on condition of beating the Russian national
hymn upon it every day, in face of the regiment, they'd take it for liberalism
and prohibit my skin... and so I confine myself to the students. I want to
leave my skeleton to the academy, but on the condition though, on the condition
that a label should be stuck on the forehead forever and ever, with the words:
'A repentant free-thinker.' There now!"

The captain spoke excitedly, and genuinely believed, of course, that there was
something fine in the American will, but he was cunning too, and very anxious
to entertain Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with whom he had played the part of a
buffoon for a long time in the past. But the latter did not even smile, on the
contrary, he asked, as it were, suspiciously:

"So you intend to publish your will in your lifetime and get rewarded for it?"

"And what if I do, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch? What if I do?" said Lebyadkin,
watching him carefully. "What sort of luck have I had? I've given up writing
poetry, and at one time even you were amused by my verses, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. Do you remember our reading them over a bottle? But it's all
over with my pen. I've written only one poem, like Gogol's 'The Last Story.' Do
you remember he proclaimed to Russia that it broke spontaneously from his
bosom? It's the same with me; I've sung my last and it's over."

"What sort of poem?"

"'In case she were to break her leg.'"

"Wha-a-t?"

That was all the captain was waiting for. He had an unbounded admiration for
his own poems, but, through a certain cunning duplicity, he was pleased, too,
that Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch always made merry over his poems, and sometimes
laughed at them immoderately. In this way he killed two birds with one stone,
satisfying at once his poetical aspirations and his desire to be of service;
but now he had a third special and very ticklish object in view. Bringing his
verses on the scene, the captain thought to exculpate himself on one point
about which, for some reason, he always felt himself most apprehensive, and
most guilty.

"'In case of her breaking her leg.' That is, of her riding on horseback. It's a
fantasy, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, a wild fancy, but the fancy of a poet. One
day I was struck by meeting a lady on horseback, and asked myself the vital
question, 'What would happen then?' That is, in case of accident. All her
followers turn away, all her suitors are gone. A pretty kettle of fish. Only
the poet remains faithful, with his heart shattered in his breast, Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. Even a louse may be in love, and is not forbidden by law. And
yet the lady was offended by the letter and the verses. I'm told that even you
were angry. Were you? I wouldn't believe in anything so grievous. Whom could I
harm simply by imagination? Besides, I swear on my honour, Liputin kept saying,
'Send it, send it,' every man, however humble, has a right to send a letter!
And so I sent it."

"You offered yourself as a suitor, I understand."

"Enemies, enemies, enemies!"

"Repeat the verses," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sternly.

"Ravings, ravings, more than anything."

However, he drew himself up, stretched out his hand, and began:

"With broken limbs my beauteous queen      Is twice as charming as before, And,
deep in love as I have been,      To-day I love her even more."

"Come, that's enough," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with a wave of his hand.

"I dream of Petersburg," cried Lebyadkin, passing quickly to another subject,
as though there had been no mention of verses. "I dream of regeneration....
Benefactor! May I reckon that you won't refuse the means for the journey? I've
been waiting for you all the week as my sunshine."

"I'll do nothing of the sort. I've scarcely any money left. And why should I
give you money?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch seemed suddenly angry. Dryly and briefly he
recapitulated all the captain's misdeeds; his drunkenness, his lying, his
squandering of the money meant for Marya Timofyevna, his having taken her from
the nunnery, his insolent letters threatening to publish the secret, the way he
had behaved about Darya Pavlovna, and so on, and so on. The captain heaved,
gesticulated, began to reply, but every time Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch stopped
him peremptorily.

"And listen," he observed at last, "you keep writing about 'family disgrace.'
What disgrace is it to you that your sister is the lawful wife of a Stavrogin?"

"But marriage in secret, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch--a fatal secret. I receive
money from you, and I'm suddenly asked the question, 'What's that money for?'
My hands are tied; I cannot answer to the detriment of my sister, to the
detriment of the family honour."

The captain raised his voice. He liked that subject and reckoned boldly upon
it. Alas! he did not realise what a blow was in store for him.

Calmly and exactly, as though he were speaking of the most everyday
arrangement, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch informed him that in a few days, perhaps
even to-morrow or the day after, he intended to make his marriage known
everywhere, "to the police as well as to local society." And so the question of
family honour would be settled once for all, and with it the question of
subsidy. The captain's eyes were ready to drop out of his head; he positively
could not take it in. It had to be explained to him.

"But she is... crazy."

"I shall make suitable arrangements."

"But... how about your mother?"

"Well, she must do as she likes."

"But will you take your wife to your house?"

"Perhaps so. But that is absolutely nothing to do with you and no concern of
yours."

"No concern of mine!" cried the captain. "What about me then?"

"Well, certainly you won't come into my house."

"But, you know, I'm a relation."

"One does one's best to escape from such relations. Why should I go on giving
you money then? Judge for yourself."

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, this is impossible. You will
think better of it, perhaps? You don't want to lay hands upon.... What will
people think? What will the world say?"

"Much I care for your world. I married your sister when the fancy took me,
after a drunken dinner, for a bet, and now I'll make it public... since that
amuses me now."

He said this with a peculiar irritability, so that Lebyadkin began with horror
to believe him.

"But me, me? What about me? I'm what matters most!... Perhaps you're joking,
Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch?"

"No, I'm not joking."

"As you will, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but I don't believe you.... Then I'll
take proceedings."

"You're fearfully stupid, captain."

"Maybe, but this is all that's left me," said the captain, losing his head
completely. "In old days we used to get free quarters, anyway, for the work she
did in the 'corners.' But what will happen now if you throw me over
altogether?"

"But you want to go to Petersburg to try a new career. By the way, is it true
what I hear, that you mean to go and give information, in the hope of obtaining
a pardon, by betraying all the others?"

The captain stood gaping with wide-open eyes, and made no answer.

"Listen, captain," Stavrogin began suddenly, with great earnestness, bending
down to the table. Until then he had been talking, as it were, ambiguously, so
that Lebyadkin, who had wide experience in playing the part of buffoon, was up
to the last moment a trifle uncertain whether his patron were really angry or
simply putting it on; whether he really had the wild intention of making his
marriage public, or whether he were only playing. Now Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch's
stern expression was so convincing that a shiver ran down the captain's back.

"Listen, and tell the truth, Lebyadkin. Have you betrayed anything yet, or not?
Have you succeeded in doing anything really? Have you sent a letter to somebody
in your foolishness?"

"No, I haven't... and I haven't thought of doing it," said the captain, looking
fixedly at him.

"That's a lie, that you haven't thought of doing it. That's what you're asking
to go to Petersburg for. If you haven't written, have you blabbed to anybody
here? Speak the truth. I've heard something."

"When I was drunk, to Liputin. Liputin's a traitor. I opened my heart to him,"
whispered the poor captain.

"That's all very well, but there's no need to be an ass. If you had an idea you
should have kept it to yourself. Sensible people hold their tongues nowadays;
they don't go chattering."

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch!" said the captain, quaking. "You've had nothing to do
with it yourself; it's not you I've..."

"Yes. You wouldn't have ventured to kill the goose that laid your golden eggs."

"Judge for yourself, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, judge for yourself," and, in
despair, with tears, the captain began hurriedly relating the story of his life
for the last four years. It was the most stupid story of a fool, drawn into
matters that did not concern him, and in his drunkenness and debauchery unable,
till the last minute, to grasp their importance. He said that before he left
Petersburg 'he had been drawn in, at first simply through friendship, like a
regular student, although he wasn't a student,' and knowing nothing about it,
'without being guilty of anything,' he had scattered various papers on
staircases, left them by dozens at doors, on bell-handles, had thrust them in
as though they were newspapers, taken them to the theatre, put them in people's
hats, and slipped them into pockets. Afterwards he had taken money from them,
'for what means had I?' He had distributed all sorts of rubbish through the
districts of two provinces. "Oh, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch!" he exclaimed, "what
revolted me most was that this was utterly opposed to civic, and still more to
patriotic laws. They suddenly printed that men were to go out with pitchforks,
and to remember that those who went out poor in the morning might go home rich
at night. Only think of it! It made me shudder, and yet I distributed it. Or
suddenly five or six lines addressed to the whole of Russia, apropos of
nothing, 'Make haste and lock up the churches, abolish God, do away with
marriage, destroy the right of inheritance, take up your knives,' that's all,
and God knows what it means. I tell you, I almost got caught with this
five-line leaflet. The officers in the regiment gave me a thrashing, but, bless
them for it, let me go. And last year I was almost caught when I passed off
French counterfeit notes for fifty roubles on Korovayev, but, thank God,
Korovayev fell into the pond when he was drunk, and was drowned in the nick of
time, and they didn't succeed in tracking me. Here, at Virginsky's, I
proclaimed the freedom of the communistic life. In June I was distributing
manifestoes again in X district. They say they will make me do it again....
Pyotr Stepanovitch suddenly gave me to understand that I must obey; he's been
threatening me a long time. How he treated me that Sunday! Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, I am a slave, I am a worm, but not a God, which is where I
differ from Derzhavin.* But I've no income, no income!"

* The reference is to a poem of Derzhavin's.

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch heard it all with curiosity.

"A great deal of that I had heard nothing of," he said. "Of course, anything
may have happened to you.... Listen," he said, after a minute's thought. "If
you like, you can tell them, you know whom, that Liputin was lying, and that
you were only pretending to give information to frighten me, supposing that I,
too, was compromised, and that you might get more money out of me that way....
Do you understand?"

"Dear Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, is it possible that there's such a danger
hanging over me? I've been longing for you to come, to ask you."

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch laughed.

"They certainly wouldn't let you go to Petersburg, even if I were to give you
money for the journey.... But it's time for me to see Marya Timofyevna." And he
got up from his chair.

"Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, but how about Marya Timofyevna?"

"Why, as I told you."

"Can it be true?"

"You still don't believe it?"

"Will you really cast me off like an old worn-out shoe?"

"I'll see," laughed Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. "Come, let me go."

"Wouldn't you like me to stand on the steps... for fear I might by chance
overhear something... for the rooms are small?"

"That's as well. Stand on the steps. Take my umbrella."

"Your umbrella.... Am I worth it?" said the captain over-sweetly.

"Anyone is worthy of an umbrella."

"At one stroke you define the minimum of human rights...."

But he was by now muttering mechanically. He was too much crushed by what he
had learned, and was completely thrown out of his reckoning. And yet almost as
soon as he had gone out on to the steps and had put up the umbrella, there his
shallow and cunning brain caught again the ever-present, comforting idea that
he was being cheated and deceived, and if so they were afraid of him, and there
was no need for him to be afraid.

"If they're lying and deceiving me, what's at the bottom of it?" was the
thought that gnawed at his mind. The public announcement of the marriage seemed
to him absurd. "It's true that with such a wonder-worker anything may come to
pass; he lives to do harm. But what if he's afraid himself, since the insult of
Sunday, and afraid as he's never been before? And so he's in a hurry to declare
that he'll announce it himself, from fear that I should announce it. Eh, don't
blunder, Lebyadkin! And why does he come on the sly, at night, if he means to
make it public himself? And if he's afraid, it means that he's afraid now, at
this moment, for these few days.... Eh, don't make a mistake, Lebyadkin!

"He scares me with Pyotr Stepanovitch. Oy, I'm frightened, I'm frightened! Yes,
this is what's so frightening! And what induced me to blab to Liputin. Goodness
knows what these devils are up to. I never can make head or tail of it. Now
they are all astir again as they were five years ago. To whom could I give
information, indeed? 'Haven't I written to anyone in my foolishness?' H'm! So
then I might write as though through foolishness? Isn't he giving me a hint?
'You're going to Petersburg on purpose.' The sly rogue. I've scarcely dreamed
of it, and he guesses my dreams. As though he were putting me up to going
himself. It's one or the other of two games he's up to. Either he's afraid
because he's been up to some pranks himself... or he's not afraid for himself,
but is simply egging me on to give them all away! Ach, it's terrible,
Lebyadkin! Ach, you must not make a blunder!"

He was so absorbed in thought that he forgot to listen. It was not easy to hear
either. The door was a solid one, and they were talking in a very low voice.
Nothing reached the captain but indistinct sounds. He positively spat in
disgust, and went out again, lost in thought, to whistle on the steps.

