# PART III - CHAPTER V. A WANDERER - I
[Metadata]: # {03.05.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.05.01}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# I
[TreeTag]: # {03.05.01.01}
THE CATASTROPHE WITH Liza and the death of Marya Timofyevna made an
overwhelming impression on Shatov. I have already mentioned that that morning I
met him in passing; he seemed to me not himself. He told me among other things
that on the evening before at nine o'clock (that is, three hours before the
fire had broken out) he had been at Marya Timofyevna's. He went in the morning
to look at the corpses, but as far as I know gave no evidence of any sort that
morning. Meanwhile, towards the end of the day there was a perfect tempest in
his soul, and... I think I can say with certainty that there was a moment at
dusk when he wanted to get up, go out and tell everything. What that
_everything_ was, no one but he could say. Of course he would have achieved
nothing, and would have simply betrayed himself. He had no proofs whatever with
which to convict the perpetrators of the crime, and, indeed, he had nothing but
vague conjectures to go upon, though to him they amounted to complete
certainty. But he was ready to ruin himself if he could only "crush the
scoundrels"--his own words. Pyotr Stepanovitch had guessed fairly correctly at
this impulse in him, and he knew himself that he was risking a great deal in
putting off the execution of his new awful project till next day. On his side
there was, as usual, great self-confidence and contempt for all these "wretched
creatures" and for Shatov in particular. He had for years despised Shatov for
his "whining idiocy," as he had expressed it in former days abroad, and he was
absolutely confident that he could deal with such a guileless creature, that
is, keep an eye on him all that day, and put a check on him at the first sign
of danger. Yet what saved "the scoundrels" for a short time was something quite
unexpected which they had not foreseen....

Towards eight o'clock in the evening (at the very time when the quintet was
meeting at Erkel's, and waiting in indignation and excitement for Pyotr
Stepanovitch) Shatov was lying in the dark on his bed with a headache and a
slight chill; he was tortured by uncertainty, he was angry, he kept making up
his mind, and could not make it up finally, and felt, with a curse, that it
would all lead to nothing. Gradually he sank into a brief doze and had
something like a nightmare. He dreamt that he was lying on his bed, tied up
with cords and unable to stir, and meantime he heard a terrible banging that
echoed all over the house, a banging on the fence, at the gate, at his door, in
Kirillov's lodge, so that the whole house was shaking, and a far-away familiar
voice that wrung his heart was calling to him piteously. He suddenly woke and
sat up in bed. To his surprise the banging at the gate went on, though not
nearly so violent as it had seemed in his dream. The knocks were repeated and
persistent, and the strange voice "that wrung his heart" could still be heard
below at the gate, though not piteously but angrily and impatiently,
alternating with another voice, more restrained and ordinary. He jumped up,
opened the casement pane and put his head out.

"Who's there?" he called, literally numb with terror.

"If you are Shatov," the answer came harshly and resolutely from below, "be so
good as to tell me straight out and honestly whether you agree to let me in or
not?"

It was true: he recognised the voice!

"Marie!... Is it you?"

"Yes, yes, Marya Shatov, and I assure you I can't keep the driver a minute
longer."

"This minute... I'll get a candle," Shatov cried faintly. Then he rushed to
look for the matches. The matches, as always happens at such moments, could not
be found. He dropped the candlestick and the candle on the floor and as soon as
he heard the impatient voice from below again, he abandoned the search and
dashed down the steep stairs to open the gate.

"Be so good as to hold the bag while I settle with this blockhead," was how
Madame Marya Shatov greeted him below, and she thrust into his hands a rather
light cheap canvas handbag studded with brass nails, of Dresden manufacture.
She attacked the driver with exasperation.

"Allow me to tell you, you are asking too much. If you've been driving me for
an extra hour through these filthy streets, that's your fault, because it seems
you didn't know where to find this stupid street and imbecile house. Take your
thirty kopecks and make up your mind that you'll get nothing more."

"Ech, lady, you told me yourself Voznesensky Street and this is Bogoyavlensky;
Voznesensky is ever so far away. You've simply put the horse into a steam."

"Voznesensky, Bogoyavlensky--you ought to know all those stupid names better
than I do, as you are an inhabitant; besides, you are unfair, I told you first
of all Filipov's house and you declared you knew it. In any case you can have
me up to-morrow in the local court, but now I beg you to let me alone."

"Here, here's another five kopecks." With eager haste Shatov pulled a
five-kopeck piece out of his pocket and gave it to the driver.

"Do me a favour, I beg you, don't dare to do that!" Madame Shatov flared up,
but the driver drove off and Shatov, taking her hand, drew her through the
gate.

"Make haste, Marie, make haste... that's no matter, and... you are wet through.
Take care, we go up here--how sorry I am there's no light--the stairs are
steep, hold tight, hold tight! Well, this is my room. Excuse my having no
light... One minute!"

He picked up the candlestick but it was a long time before the matches were
found. Madame Shatov stood waiting in the middle of the room, silent and
motionless.

"Thank God, here they are at last!" he cried joyfully, lighting up the room.
Marya Shatov took a cursory survey of his abode.

"They told me you lived in a poor way, but I didn't expect it to be as bad as
this," she pronounced with an air of disgust, and she moved towards the bed.

"Oh, I am tired!" she sat down on the hard bed, with an exhausted air. "Please
put down the bag and sit down on the chair yourself. Just as you like though;
you are in the way standing there. I have come to you for a time, till I can
get work, because I know nothing of this place and I have no money. But if I
shall be in your way I beg you again, be so good as to tell me so at once, as
you are bound to do if you are an honest man. I could sell something to-morrow
and pay for a room at an hotel, but you must take me to the hotel yourself....
Oh, but I am tired!"

Shatov was all of a tremor.

"You mustn't, Marie, you mustn't go to an hotel! An hotel! What for? What for?"

He clasped his hands imploringly....

"Well, if I can get on without the hotel... I must, any way, explain the
position. Remember, Shatov, that we lived in Geneva as man and wife for a
fortnight and a few days; it's three years since we parted, without any
particular quarrel though. But don't imagine that I've come back to renew any
of the foolishness of the past. I've come back to look for work, and that I've
come straight to this town is just because it's all the same to me. I've not
come to say I am sorry for anything; please don't imagine anything so stupid as
that."

"Oh, Marie! This is unnecessary, quite unnecessary," Shatov muttered vaguely.

"If so, if you are so far developed as to be able to understand that, I may
allow myself to add, that if I've come straight to you now and am in your
lodging, it's partly because I always thought you were far from being a
scoundrel and were perhaps much better than other... blackguards!"

Her eyes flashed. She must have had to bear a great deal at the hands of some
"blackguards."

"And please believe me, I wasn't laughing at you just now when I told you you
were good. I spoke plainly, without fine phrases and I can't endure them. But
that's all nonsense. I always hoped you would have sense enough not to pester
me.... Enough, I am tired."

And she bent on him a long, harassed and weary gaze. Shatov stood facing her at
the other end of the room, which was five paces away, and listened to her
timidly with a look of new life and unwonted radiance on his face. This strong,
rugged man, all bristles on the surface, was suddenly all softness and shining
gladness. There was a thrill of extraordinary and unexpected feeling in his
soul. Three years of separation, three years of the broken marriage had effaced
nothing from his heart. And perhaps every day during those three years he had
dreamed of her, of that beloved being who had once said to him, "I love you."
Knowing Shatov I can say with certainty that he could never have allowed
himself even to dream that a woman might say to him, "I love you." He was
savagely modest and chaste, he looked on himself as a perfect monster, detested
his own face as well as his character, compared himself to some freak only fit
to be exhibited at fairs. Consequently he valued honesty above everything and
was fanatically devoted to his convictions; he was gloomy, proud, easily moved
to wrath, and sparing of words. But here was the one being who had loved him
for a fortnight (that he had never doubted, never!), a being he had always
considered immeasurably above him in spite of his perfectly sober understanding
of her errors; a being to whom he could forgive everything, _everything_ (of
that there could be no question; indeed it was quite the other way, his idea
was that he was entirely to blame); this woman, this Marya Shatov, was in his
house, in his presence again... it was almost inconceivable! He was so
overcome, there was so much that was terrible and at the same time so much
happiness in this event that he could not, perhaps would not--perhaps was
afraid to--realise the position. It was a dream. But when she looked at him
with that harassed gaze he suddenly understood that this woman he loved so
dearly was suffering, perhaps had been wronged. His heart went cold. He looked
at her features with anguish: the first bloom of youth had long faded from this
exhausted face. It's true that she was still good-looking--in his eyes a
beauty, as she had always been. In reality she was a woman of twenty-five,
rather strongly built, above the medium height (taller than Shatov), with
abundant dark brown hair, a pale oval face, and large dark eyes now glittering
with feverish brilliance. But the light-hearted, naïve and good-natured energy
he had known so well in the past was replaced now by a sullen irritability and
disillusionment, a sort of cynicism which was not yet habitual to her herself,
and which weighed upon her. But the chief thing was that she was ill, that he
could see clearly. In spite of the awe in which he stood of her he suddenly
went up to her and took her by both hands.

"Marie... you know... you are very tired, perhaps, for God's sake, don't be
angry.... If you'd consent to have some tea, for instance, eh? Tea picks one up
so, doesn't it? If you'd consent!"

"Why talk about consenting! Of course I consent, what a baby you are still. Get
me some if you can. How cramped you are here. How cold it is!"

"Oh, I'll get some logs for the fire directly, some logs... I've got logs."
Shatov was all astir. "Logs... that is... but I'll get tea directly," he waved
his hand as though with desperate determination and snatched up his cap.

"Where are you going? So you've no tea in the house?"

"There shall be, there shall be, there shall be, there shall be everything
directly.... I..." he took his revolver from the shelf, "I'll sell this
revolver directly... or pawn it...."

"What foolishness and what a time that will take! Take my money if you've
nothing, there's eighty kopecks here, I think; that's all I have. This is like
a madhouse."

"I don't want your money, I don't want it I'll be here directly, in one
instant. I can manage without the revolver...."

And he rushed straight to Kirillov's. This was probably two hours before the
visit of Pyotr Stepanovitch and Liputin to Kirillov. Though Shatov and Kirillov
lived in the same yard they hardly ever saw each other, and when they met they
did not nod or speak: they had been too long "lying side by side" in
America....

"Kirillov, you always have tea; have you got tea and a samovar?"

Kirillov, who was walking up and down the room, as he was in the habit of doing
all night, stopped and looked intently at his hurried visitor, though without
much surprise.

"I've got tea and sugar and a samovar. But there's no need of the samovar, the
tea is hot. Sit down and simply drink it."

"Kirillov, we lay side by side in America.... My wife has come to me ... I...
give me the tea.... I shall want the samovar."

"If your wife is here you want the samovar. But take it later. I've two. And
now take the teapot from the table. It's hot, boiling hot. Take everything,
take the sugar, all of it. Bread... there's plenty of bread; all of it. There's
some veal. I've a rouble."

"Give it me, friend, I'll pay it back to-morrow! Ach, Kirillov!"

"Is it the same wife who was in Switzerland? That's a good thing. And your
running in like this, that's a good thing too."

"Kirillov!" cried Shatov, taking the teapot under his arm and carrying the
bread and sugar in both hands. "Kirillov, if... if you could get rid of your
dreadful fancies and give up your atheistic ravings... oh, what a man you'd be,
Kirillov!"

"One can see you love your wife after Switzerland. It's a good thing you
do--after Switzerland. When you want tea, come again. You can come all night, I
don't sleep at all. There'll be a samovar. Take the rouble, here it is. Go to
your wife, I'll stay here and think about you and your wife."

Marya Shatov was unmistakably pleased at her husband's haste and fell upon the
tea almost greedily, but there was no need to run for the samovar; she drank
only half a cup and swallowed a tiny piece of bread. The veal she refused with
disgust and irritation.

"You are ill, Marie, all this is a sign of illness," Shatov remarked timidly as
he waited upon her.

"Of course I'm ill, please sit down. Where did you get the tea if you haven't
any?"

Shatov told her about Kirillov briefly. She had heard something of him.

"I know he is mad; say no more, please; there are plenty of fools. So you've
been in America? I heard, you wrote."

"Yes, I... I wrote to you in Paris."

"Enough, please talk of something else. Are you a Slavophil in your
convictions?"

"I... I am not exactly.... Since I cannot be a Russian, I became a Slavophil."
He smiled a wry smile with the effort of one who feels he has made a strained
and inappropriate jest.

"Why, aren't you a Russian?"

"No, I'm not."

"Well, that's all foolishness. Do sit down, I entreat you. Why are you all over
the place? Do you think I am lightheaded? Perhaps I shall be. You say there are
only you two in the house."

"Yes.... Downstairs..."

"And both such clever people. What is there downstairs? You said downstairs?"

"No, nothing."

"Why nothing? I want to know."

"I only meant to say that now we are only two in the yard, but that the
Lebyadkins used to live downstairs...."

"That woman who was murdered last night?" she started suddenly. "I heard of it.
I heard of it as soon as I arrived. There was a fire here, wasn't there?"

"Yes, Marie, yes, and perhaps I am doing a scoundrelly thing this moment in
forgiving the scoundrels...." He stood up suddenly and paced about the room,
raising his arms as though in a frenzy.

But Marie had not quite understood him. She heard his answers inattentively;
she asked questions but did not listen.

"Fine things are being done among you! Oh, how contemptible it all is! What
scoundrels men all are! But do sit down, I beg you, oh, how you exasperate me!"
and she let her head sink on the pillow, exhausted.

"Marie, I won't.... Perhaps you'll lie down, Marie?" She made no answer and
closed her eyes helplessly. Her pale face looked death-like. She fell asleep
almost instantly. Shatov looked round, snuffed the candle, looked uneasily at
her face once more, pressed his hands tight in front of him and walked on
tiptoe out of the room into the passage. At the top of the stairs he stood in
the corner with his face to the wall and remained so for ten minutes without
sound or movement. He would have stood there longer, but he suddenly caught the
sound of soft cautious steps below. Someone was coming up the stairs. Shatov
remembered he had forgotten to fasten the gate.

"Who's there?" he asked in a whisper. The unknown visitor went on slowly
mounting the stairs without answering. When he reached the top he stood still;
it was impossible to see his face in the dark; suddenly Shatov heard the
cautious question:

"Ivan Shatov?"

Shatov said who he was, but at once held out his hand to check his advance. The
latter took his hand, and Shatov shuddered as though he had touched some
terrible reptile.

"Stand here," he whispered quickly. "Don't go in, I can't receive you just now.
My wife has come back. I'll fetch the candle."

When he returned with the candle he found a young officer standing there; he
did not know his name but he had seen him before.

"Erkel," said the lad, introducing himself. "You've seen me at Virginsky's."

"I remember; you sat writing. Listen," said Shatov in sudden excitement, going
up to him frantically, but still talking in a whisper. "You gave me a sign just
now when you took my hand. But you know I can treat all these signals with
contempt! I don't acknowledge them.... I don't want them.... I can throw you
downstairs this minute, do you know that?"

"No, I know nothing about that and I don't know what you are in such a rage
about," the visitor answered without malice and almost ingenuously. "I have
only to give you a message, and that's what I've come for, being particularly
anxious not to lose time. You have a printing press which does not belong to
you, and of which you are bound to give an account, as you know yourself. I
have received instructions to request you to give it up to-morrow at seven
o'clock in the evening to Liputin. I have been instructed to tell you also that
nothing more will be asked of you."

"Nothing?"

"Absolutely nothing. Your request is granted, and you are struck off our list.
I was instructed to tell you that positively."

"Who instructed you to tell me?"

"Those who told me the sign."

"Have you come from abroad?"

"I... I think that's no matter to you."

"Oh, hang it! Why didn't you come before if you were told to?"

"I followed certain instructions and was not alone."

"I understand, I understand that you were not alone. Eh... hang it! But why
didn't Liputin come himself?"

"So I shall come for you to-morrow at exactly six o'clock in the evening, and
we'll go there on foot. There will be no one there but us three."

"Will Verhovensky be there?"

"No, he won't. Verhovensky is leaving the town at eleven o'clock to-morrow
morning."

"Just what I thought!" Shatov whispered furiously, and he struck his fist on
his hip. "He's run off, the sneak!"

He sank into agitated reflection. Erkel looked intently at him and waited in
silence.

"But how will you take it? You can't simply pick it up in your hands and carry
it."

"There will be no need to. You'll simply point out the place and we'll just
make sure that it really is buried there. We only know whereabouts the place
is, we don't know the place itself. And have you pointed the place out to
anyone else yet?"

Shatov looked at him.

"You, you, a chit of a boy like you, a silly boy like you, you too have got
caught in that net like a sheep? Yes, that's just the young blood they want!
Well, go along. E-ech! that scoundrel's taken you all in and run away."

Erkel looked at him serenely and calmly but did not seem to understand.

"Verhovensky, Verhovensky has run away!" Shatov growled fiercely.

"But he is still here, he is not gone away. He is not going till to-morrow,"
Erkel observed softly and persuasively. "I particularly begged him to be
present as a witness; my instructions all referred to him (he explained frankly
like a young and inexperienced boy). But I regret to say he did not agree on
the ground of his departure, and he really is in a hurry."

Shatov glanced compassionately at the simple youth again, but suddenly gave a
gesture of despair as though he thought "they are not worth pitying."

"All right, I'll come," he cut him short. "And now get away, be off."

"So I'll come for you at six o'clock punctually." Erkel made a courteous bow
and walked deliberately downstairs.

"Little fool!" Shatov could not help shouting after him from the top.

"What is it?" responded the lad from the bottom.

"Nothing, you can go."

"I thought you said something."

