# PART III - CHAPTER IV. THE LAST RESOLUTION - II
[Metadata]: # {03.04.02}
[Descriptor]: # {03.04.02}
[Author]: # {constance garrett}
# II
[TreeTag]: # {03.04.02.01}
All our fellows believed that Shatov was going to betray them; but they also
believed that Pyotr Stepanovitch was playing with them like pawns. And yet they
knew, too, that in any case they would all meet on the spot next day and that
Shatov's fate was sealed. They suddenly felt like flies caught in a web by a
huge spider; they were furious, but they were trembling with terror.

Pyotr Stepanovitch, of course, had treated them badly; it might all have gone
off far more harmoniously and easily if he had taken the trouble to embellish
the facts ever so little. Instead of putting the facts in a decorous light, as
an exploit worthy of ancient Rome or something of the sort, he simply appealed
to their animal fears and laid stress on the danger to their own skins, which
was simply insulting; of course there was a struggle for existence in
everything and there was no other principle in nature, they all knew that, but
still....

But Pyotr Stepanovitch had no time to trot out the Romans; he was completely
thrown out of his reckoning. Stavrogin's flight had astounded and crushed him.
It was a lie when he said that Stavrogin had seen the vice-governor; what
worried Pyotr Stepanovitch was that Stavrogin had gone off without seeing
anyone, even his mother--and it was certainly strange that he had been allowed
to leave without hindrance. (The authorities were called to account for it
afterwards.) Pyotr Stepanovitch had been making inquiries all day, but so far
had found out nothing, and he had never been so upset. And how could he, how
could he give up Stavrogin all at once like this! That was why he could not be
very tender with the quintet. Besides, they tied his hands: he had already
decided to gallop after Stavrogin at once; and meanwhile he was detained by
Shatov; he had to cement the quintet together once for all, in case of
emergency. "Pity to waste them, they might be of use." That, I imagine, was his
way of reasoning.

As for Shatov, Pyotr Stepanovitch was firmly convinced that he would betray
them. All that he had told the others about it was a lie: he had never seen the
document nor heard of it, but he thought it as certain as that twice two makes
four. It seemed to him that what had happened--the death of Liza, the death of
Marya Timofyevna--would be too much for Shatov, and that he would make up his
mind at once. Who knows? perhaps he had grounds for supposing it. It is known,
too, that he hated Shatov personally; there had at some time been a quarrel
between them, and Pyotr Stepanovitch never forgave an offence. I am convinced,
indeed, that this was his leading motive.

We have narrow brick pavements in our town, and in some streets only raised
wooden planks instead of a pavement. Pyotr Stepanovitch walked in the middle of
the pavement, taking up the whole of it, utterly regardless of Liputin, who had
no room to walk beside him and so had to hurry a step behind or run in the
muddy road if he wanted to speak to him. Pyotr Stepanovitch suddenly remembered
how he had lately splashed through the mud to keep pace with Stavrogin, who had
walked, as he was doing now, taking up the whole pavement. He recalled the
whole scene, and rage choked him.

But Liputin, too, was choking with resentment. Pyotr Stepanovitch might treat
the others as he liked, but him! Why, he knew more than all the rest, was in
closer touch with the work and taking more intimate part in it than anyone, and
hitherto his services had been continual, though indirect. Oh, he knew that
even now Pyotr Stepanovitch might ruin him _if it came to the worst._ But he
had long hated Pyotr Stepanovitch, and not because he was a danger but because
of his overbearing manner. Now, when he had to make up his mind to such a deed,
he raged inwardly more than all the rest put together. Alas! he knew that next
day "like a slave" he would be the first on the spot and would bring the
others, and if he could somehow have murdered Pyotr Stepanovitch before the
morrow, without ruining himself, of course, he would certainly have murdered
him.

Absorbed in his sensations, he trudged dejectedly after his tormentor, who
seemed to have forgotten his existence, though he gave him a rude and careless
shove with his elbow now and then. Suddenly Pyotr Stepanovitch halted in one of
the principal thoroughfares and went into a restaurant.

"What are you doing?" cried Liputin, boiling over. "This is a restaurant."

"I want a beefsteak."

"Upon my word! It is always full of people."

"What if it is?"

"But... we shall be late. It's ten o'clock already."

"You can't be too late to go there."

"But I shall be late! They are expecting me back."

"Well, let them; but it would be stupid of you to go to them. With all your
bobbery I've had no dinner. And the later you go to Kirillov's the more sure
you are to find him."

Pyotr Stepanovitch went to a room apart. Liputin sat in an easy chair on one
side, angry and resentful, and watched him eating. Half an hour and more
passed. Pyotr Stepanovitch did not hurry himself; he ate with relish, rang the
bell, asked for a different kind of mustard, then for beer, without saying a
word to Liputin. He was pondering deeply. He was capable of doing two things at
once--eating with relish and pondering deeply. Liputin loathed him so intensely
at last that he could not tear himself away. It was like a nervous obsession.
He counted every morsel of beefsteak that Pyotr Stepanovitch put into his
mouth; he loathed him for the way he opened it, for the way he chewed, for the
way he smacked his lips over the fat morsels, he loathed the steak itself. At
last things began to swim before his eyes; he began to feel slightly giddy; he
felt hot and cold run down his spine by turns.

"You are doing nothing; read that," said Pyotr Stepanovitch suddenly, throwing
him a sheet of paper. Liputin went nearer to the candle. The paper was closely
covered with bad handwriting, with corrections in every line. By the time he
had mastered it Pyotr Stepanovitch had paid his bill and was ready to go. When
they were on the pavement Liputin handed him back the paper.

"Keep it; I'll tell you afterwards.... What do you say to it, though?"

Liputin shuddered all over.

"In my opinion... such a manifesto... is nothing but a ridiculous absurdity."

His anger broke out; he felt as though he were being caught up and carried
along.

"If we decide to distribute such manifestoes," he said, quivering all over,
"we'll make ourselves, contemptible by our stupidity and incompetence."

"H'm! I think differently," said Pyotr Stepanovitch, walking on resolutely.

"So do I; surely it isn't your work?"

"That's not your business."

"I think too that doggerel, 'A Noble Personality,' is the most utter trash
possible, and it couldn't have been written by Herzen."

"You are talking nonsense; it's a good poem."

"I am surprised, too, for instance," said Liputin, still dashing along with
desperate leaps, "that it is suggested that we should act so as to bring
everything to the ground. It's natural in Europe to wish to destroy everything
because there's a proletariat there, but we are only amateurs here and in my
opinion are only showing off."

"I thought you were a Fourierist."

"Fourier says something quite different, quite different."

"I know it's nonsense."

"No, Fourier isn't nonsense.... Excuse me, I can't believe that there will be a
rising in May."

Liputin positively unbuttoned his coat, he was so hot.

"Well, that's enough; but now, that I mayn't forget it," said Pyotr
Stepanovitch, passing with extraordinary coolness to another subject, "you will
have to print this manifesto with your own hands. We're going to dig up
Shatov's printing press, and you will take it to-morrow. As quickly as possible
you must print as many copies as you can, and then distribute them all the
winter. The means will be provided. You must do as many copies as possible, for
you'll be asked for them from other places."

"No, excuse me; I can't undertake such a... I decline."

"You'll take it all the same. I am acting on the instructions of the central
committee, and you are bound to obey."

"And I consider that our centres abroad have forgotten what Russia is like and
have lost all touch, and that's why they talk such nonsense.... I even think
that instead of many hundreds of quintets in Russia, we are the only one that
exists, and there is no network at all," Liputin gasped finally.

"The more contemptible of you, then, to run after the cause without believing
in it... and you are running after me now like a mean little cur."

"No, I'm not. We have a full right to break off and found a new society."

"Fool!" Pyotr Stepanovitch boomed at him threateningly all of a sudden, with
flashing eyes.

They stood facing one another for some time. Pyotr Stepanovitch turned and
pursued his way confidently.

The idea flashed through Liputin's mind, "Turn and go back; if I don't turn now
I shall never go back." He pondered this for ten steps, but at the eleventh a
new and desperate idea flashed into his mind: he did not turn and did not go
back.

They were approaching Filipov's house, but before reaching it they turned down
a side street, or, to be more accurate, an inconspicuous path under a fence, so
that for some time they had to walk along a steep slope above a ditch where
they could not keep their footing without holding the fence. At a dark corner
in the slanting fence Pyotr Stepanovitch took out a plank, leaving a gap,
through which he promptly scrambled. Liputin was surprised, but he crawled
through after him; then they replaced the plank after them. This was the secret
way by which Fedka used to visit Kirillov.

"Shatov mustn't know that we are here," Pyotr Stepanovitch whispered sternly to
Liputin.

