# PART III - CHAPTER III. A ROMANCE ENDED - I
[Metadata]: # {03.03.01}
[Descriptor]: # {03.03.01}
[Author]: # {Constance Garrett}
PART III
CHAPTER III. A ROMANCE ENDED
I
# I
FROM THE LARGE BALLROOM of Skvoreshniki (the room in which the last interview
with Varvara Petrovna and Stepan Trofimovitch had taken place) the fire could
be plainly seen. At daybreak, soon after five in the morning, Liza was standing
at the farthest window on the right looking intently at the fading glow. She
was alone in the room. She was wearing the dress she had worn the day before at
the matin√©e--a very smart light green dress covered with lace, but crushed and
put on carelessly and with haste. Suddenly noticing that some of the hooks were
undone in front she flushed, hurriedly set it right, snatched up from a chair
the red shawl she had flung down when she came in the day before, and put it
round her neck. Some locks of her luxuriant hair had come loose and showed
below the shawl on her right shoulder. Her face looked weary and careworn, but
her eyes glowed under her frowning brows. She went up to the window again and
pressed her burning forehead against the cold pane. The door opened and Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch came in.

"I've sent a messenger on horseback," he said. "In ten minutes we shall hear
all about it, meantime the servants say that part of the riverside quarter has
been burnt down, on the right side of the bridge near the quay. It's been
burning since eleven o'clock; now the fire is going down."

He did not go near the window, but stood three steps behind her; she did not
turn towards him.

"It ought to have been light an hour ago by the calendar, and it's still almost
night," she said irritably.

"'Calendars always tell lies,'" he observed with a polite smile, but, a little
ashamed; he made haste to add: "It's dull to live by the calendar, Liza."

And he relapsed into silence, vexed at the ineptitude of the second sentence.
Liza gave a wry smile.

"You are in such a melancholy mood that you cannot even find words to speak to
me. But you need not trouble, there's a point in what you said. I always live
by the calendar. Every step I take is regulated by the calendar. Does that
surprise you?"

She turned quickly from the window and sat down in a low chair.

"You sit down, too, please. We haven't long to be together and I want to say
anything I like.... Why shouldn't you, too, say anything you like?"

Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch sat beside her and softly, almost timidly took her
hand.

"What's the meaning of this tone, Liza? Where has it suddenly sprung from? What
do you mean by 'we haven't long to be together'? That's the second mysterious
phrase since you waked, half an hour ago."

"You are beginning to reckon up my mysterious phrases!" she laughed. "Do you
remember I told you I was a dead woman when I came in yesterday? That you
thought fit to forget. To forget or not to notice."

"I don't remember, Liza. Why dead? You must live."

"And is that all? You've quite lost your flow of words. I've lived my hour and
that's enough. Do you remember Christopher Ivanovitch?"

"No I don't," he answered, frowning.

"Christopher Ivanovitch at Lausanne? He bored you dreadfully. He always used to
open the door and say, 'I've come for one minute,' and then stay the whole day.
I don't want to be like Christopher Ivanovitch and stay the whole day."

A look of pain came into his face.

"Liza, it grieves me, this unnatural language. This affectation must hurt you,
too. What's it for? What's the object of it?"

His eyes glowed.

"Liza," he cried, "I swear I love you now more than yesterday when you came to
me!"

"What a strange declaration! Why bring in yesterday and to-day and these
comparisons?"

"You won't leave me," he went on, almost with despair; "we will go away
together, to-day, won't we? Won't we?"

"Aie, don't squeeze my hand so painfully! Where could we go together to-day? To
'rise again' somewhere? No, we've made experiments enough... and it's too slow
for me; and I am not fit for it; it's too exalted for me. If we are to go, let
it be to Moscow, to pay visits and entertain--that's my ideal you know; even in
Switzerland I didn't disguise from you what I was like. As we can't go to
Moscow and pay visits since you are married, it's no use talking of that."

"Liza! What happened yesterday!"

"What happened is over!"

"That's impossible! That's cruel!"

"What if it is cruel? You must bear it if it is cruel."

"You are avenging yourself on me for yesterday's caprice," he muttered with an
angry smile. Liza flushed.

"What a mean thought!"

"Why then did you bestow on me... so great a happiness? Have I the right to
know?"

"No, you must manage without rights; don't aggravate the meanness of your
supposition by stupidity. You are not lucky to-day. By the way, you surely
can't be afraid of public opinion and that you will be blamed for this 'great
happiness'? If that's it, for God's sake don't alarm yourself. It's not your
doing at all and you are not responsible to anyone. When I opened your door
yesterday, you didn't even know who was coming in. It was simply my caprice, as
you expressed it just now, and nothing more! You can look every one in the face
boldly and triumphantly!"

"Your words, that laugh, have been making me feel cold with horror for the last
hour. That 'happiness' of which you speak frantically is worth... everything to
me. How can I lose you now? I swear I loved you less yesterday. Why are you
taking everything from me to-day? Do you know what it has cost me, this new
hope? I've paid for it with life."

"Your own life or another's?"

He got up quickly.

"What does that mean?" he brought out, looking at her steadily.

"Have you paid for it with your life or with mine? is what I mean. Or have you
lost all power of understanding?" cried Liza, flushing. "Why did you start up
so suddenly? Why do you stare at me with such a look? You frighten me. What is
it you are afraid of all the time? I noticed some time ago that you were afraid
and you are now, this very minute... Good heavens, how pale you are!"

"If you know anything, Liza, I swear I don't... and I wasn't talking of _that_
just now when I said that I had paid for it with life...."

"I don't understand you," she brought out, faltering apprehensively.

At last a slow brooding smile came on to his lips. He slowly sat down, put his
elbows on his knees, and covered his face with his hands.

"A bad dream and delirium.... We were talking of two different things."

"I don't know what you were talking about.... Do you mean to say you did not
know yesterday that I should leave you to-day, did you know or not? Don't tell
a lie, did you or not?"

"I did," he said softly.

"Well then, what would you have? You knew and yet you accepted 'that moment'
for yourself. Aren't we quits?"

"Tell me the whole truth," he cried in intense distress. "When you opened my
door yesterday, did you know yourself that it was only for one hour?"

She looked at him with hatred.

"Really, the most sensible person can ask most amazing questions. And why are
you so uneasy? Can it be vanity that a woman should leave you first instead of
your leaving her? Do you know, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, since I've been with
you I've discovered that you are very generous to me, and it's just that I
can't endure from you."

He got up from his seat and took a few steps about the room.

"Very well, perhaps it was bound to end so.... But how can it all have
happened?"

"That's a question to worry about! Especially as you know the answer yourself
perfectly well, and understand it better than anyone on earth, and were
counting on it yourself. I am a young lady, my heart has been trained on the
opera, that's how it all began, that's the solution."

"No."

"There is nothing in it to fret your vanity. It is all the absolute truth. It
began with a fine moment which was too much for me to bear. The day before
yesterday, when I 'insulted' you before every one and you answered me so
chivalrously, I went home and guessed at once that you were running away from
me because you were married, and not from contempt for me which, as a
fashionable young lady, I dreaded more than anything. I understood that it was
for my sake, for me, mad as I was, that you ran away. You see how I appreciate
your generosity. Then Pyotr Stepanovitch skipped up to me and explained it all
to me at once. He revealed to me that you were dominated by a 'great idea,'
before which he and I were as nothing, but yet that I was a stumbling-block in
your path. He brought himself in, he insisted that we three should work
together, and said the most fantastic things about a boat and about maple-wood
oars out of some Russian song. I complimented him and told him he was a poet,
which he swallowed as the real thing. And as apart from him I had known long
before that I had not the strength to do anything for long, I made up my mind
on the spot. Well, that's all and quite enough, and please let us have no more
explanations. We might quarrel. Don't be afraid of anyone, I take it all on
myself. I am horrid and capricious, I was fascinated by that operatic boat, I
am a young lady... but you know I did think that you were dreadfully in love
with me. Don't despise the poor fool, and don't laugh at the tear that dropped
just now. I am awfully given to crying with self-pity. Come, that's enough,
that's enough. I am no good for anything and you are no good for anything; it's
as bad for both of us, so let's comfort ourselves with that. Anyway, it eases
our vanity."

"Dream and delirium," cried Stavrogin, wringing his hands, and pacing about the
room. "Liza, poor child, what have you done to yourself?"

"I've burnt myself in a candle, nothing more. Surely you are not crying, too?
You should show less feeling and better breeding...."

"Why, why did you come to me?"

"Don't you understand what a ludicrous position you put yourself in in the eyes
of the world by asking such questions?"

"Why have you ruined yourself, so grotesquely and so stupidly, and what's to be
done now?"

"And this is Stavrogin, 'the vampire Stavrogin,' as you are called by a lady
here who is in love with you! Listen! I have told you already, I've put all my
life into one hour and I am at peace. Do the same with yours... though you've
no need to: you have plenty of 'hours' and 'moments' of all sorts before you."

"As many as you; I give you my solemn word, not one hour more than you!"

He was still walking up and down and did not see the rapid penetrating glance
she turned upon him, in which there seemed a dawning hope. But the light died
away at the same moment.

"If you knew what it costs me that I can't be sincere at this moment, Liza, if
I could only tell you..."

"Tell me? You want to tell me something, to me? God save me from your secrets!"
she broke in almost in terror. He stopped and waited uneasily.

"I ought to confess that ever since those days in Switzerland I have had a
strong feeling that you have something awful, loathsome, some bloodshed on your
conscience... and yet something that would make you look very ridiculous.
Beware of telling me, if it's true: I shall laugh you to scorn. I shall laugh
at you for the rest of your life.... Aie, you are turning pale again? I won't,
I won't, I'll go at once." She jumped up from her chair with a movement of
disgust and contempt.

"Torture me, punish me, vent your spite on me," he cried in despair. "You have
the full right. I knew I did not love you and yet I ruined you! Yes, I accepted
the moment for my own; I had a hope... I've had it a long time... my last
hope.... I could not resist the radiance that flooded my heart when you came in
to me yesterday, of yourself, alone, of your own accord. I suddenly
believed.... Perhaps I have faith in it still."

"I will repay such noble frankness by being as frank. I don't want to be a
Sister of Mercy for you. Perhaps I really may become a nurse unless I happen
appropriately to die to-day; but if I do I won't be your nurse, though, of
course, you need one as much as any crippled creature. I always fancied that
you would take me to some place where there was a huge wicked spider, big as a
man, and we should spend our lives looking at it and being afraid of it. That's
how our love would spend itself. Appeal to Dashenka; she will go with you
anywhere you like."

"Can't you help thinking of her even now?"

"Poor little spaniel! Give her my greetings. Does she know that even in
Switzerland you had fixed on her for your old age? What prudence! What
foresight! Aie, who's that?"

At the farther end of the room a door opened a crack; a head was thrust in and
vanished again hurriedly.

"Is that you, Alexey Yegorytch?" asked Stavrogin.

"No, it's only I." Pyotr Stepanovitch thrust himself half in again. "How do you
do, Lizaveta Nikolaevna? Good morning, anyway. I guessed I should find you both
in this room. I have come for one moment literally, Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch. I
was anxious to have a couple of words with you at all costs... absolutely
necessary... only a few words!"

Stavrogin moved towards him but turned back to Liza at the third step.

"If you hear anything directly, Liza, let me tell you I am to blame for it!"

She started and looked at him in dismay; but he hurriedly went out.

