# PART ONE



PREFATORY

MATTERS





1
# 

JOB INTERVIEW

Jack Torrance thought: Officious little prick.

Ullman stood five-five, and when he moved, it was with the prissy speed that
seems to be the exclusive domain of all small plump men. The part in his hair
was exact, and his dark suit was sober but comforting. I am a man you can bring
your problems to, that suit said to the paying customer. To the hired help it
spoke more curtly: This had better be good, you. There was a red carnation in
the lapel, perhaps so that no one on the street would mistake Stuart Ullman for
the local undertaker.

As he listened to Ullman speak, Jack admitted to himself that he probably could
not have liked any man on that side of the desk—under the circumstances.

Ullman had asked a question he hadn’t caught. That was bad; Ullman was the type
of man who would file such lapses away in a mental Rolodex for later
consideration.

“I’m sorry?”

“I asked if your wife fully understood what you would be taking on here. And
there’s your son, of course.” He glanced down at the application in front of
him. “Daniel. Your wife isn’t a bit intimidated by the idea?”

“Wendy is an extraordinary woman.”

“And your son is also extraordinary?”

Jack smiled, a big wide PR smile. “We like to think so, I suppose. He’s quite
self-reliant for a five-year-old.”

No returning smile from Ullman. He slipped Jack’s application back into a file.
The file went into a drawer. The desk top was now completely bare except for a
blotter, a telephone, a Tensor lamp, and an in/out basket. Both sides of the
in/out were empty, too.

Ullman stood up and went to the file cabinet in the corner. “Step around the
desk, if you will, Mr. Torrance. We’ll look at the hotel floor plans.”

He brought back five large sheets and set them down on the glossy walnut plain
of the desk. Jack stood by his shoulder, very much aware of the scent of
Ullman’s cologne. All my men wear English Leather or they wear nothing at all
came into his mind for no reason at all, and he had to clamp his tongue between
his teeth to keep in a bray of laughter. Beyond the wall, faintly, came the
sounds of the Overlook Hotel’s kitchen, gearing down from lunch.

“Top floor,” Ullman said briskly. “The attic. Absolutely nothing up there now
but bric-a-brac. The Overlook has changed hands several times since World War
II and it seems that each successive manager has put everything they don’t want
up in the attic. I want rattraps and poison bait sowed around in it. Some of
the third-floor chambermaids say they have heard rustling noises. I don’t
believe it, not for a moment, but there mustn’t even be that one-in-a-hundred
chance that a single rat inhabits the Overlook Hotel.”

Jack, who suspected that every hotel in the world had a rat or two, held his
tongue.

“Of course you wouldn’t allow your son up in the attic under any
circumstances.”

“No,” Jack said, and flashed the big PR smile again. Humiliating situation. Did
this officious little prick actually think he would allow his son to goof
around in a rattrap attic full of junk furniture and God knew what else?

Ullman whisked away the attic floor plan and put it on the bottom of the pile.

“The Overlook has one hundred and ten guest quarters,” he said in a scholarly
voice. “Thirty of them, all suites, are here on the third floor. Ten in the
west wing (including the Presidential Suite), ten in the center, ten more in
the east wing. All of them command magnificent views.”

Could you at least spare the salestalk?

But he kept quiet. He needed the job.

Ullman put the third floor on the bottom of the pile and they studied the
second floor.

“Forty rooms,” Ullman said, “thirty doubles and ten singles. And on the first
floor, twenty of each. Plus three linen closets on each floor, and a storeroom
which is at the extreme east end of the hotel on the second floor and the
extreme west end on the first. Questions?”

Jack shook his head. Ullman whisked the second and first floors away.

“Now. Lobby level. Here in the center is the registration desk. Behind it are
the offices. The lobby runs for eighty feet in either direction from the desk.
Over here in the west wing is the Overlook Dining Room and the Colorado Lounge.
The banquet and ballroom facility is in the east wing. Questions?”

“Only about the basement,” Jack said. “For the winter caretaker, that’s the
most important level of all. Where the action is, so to speak.”

“Watson will show you all that. The basement floor plan is on the boiler room
wall.” He frowned impressively, perhaps to show that as manager, he did not
concern himself with such mundane aspects of the Overlook’s operation as the
boiler and the plumbing. “Might not be a bad idea to put some traps down there
too. Just a minute . . .”

He scrawled a note on a pad he took from his inner coat pocket (each sheet bore
the legend From the Desk of Stuart Ullman in bold black script), tore it off,
and dropped it into the out basket. It sat there looking lonesome. The pad
disappeared back into Ullman’s jacket pocket like the conclusion of a
magician’s trick. Now you see it, Jacky-boy, now you don’t. This guy is a real
heavyweight.

They had resumed their original positions, Ullman behind the desk and Jack in
front of it, interviewer and interviewee, supplicant and reluctant patron.
Ullman folded his neat little hands on the desk blotter and looked directly at
Jack, a small, balding man in a banker’s suit and a quiet gray tie. The flower
in his lapel was balanced off by a small lapel pin on the other side. It read
simply STAFF in small gold letters.

“I’ll be perfectly frank with you, Mr. Torrance. Albert Shockley is a powerful
man with a large interest in the Overlook, which showed a profit this season
for the first time in its history. Mr. Shockley also sits on the Board of
Directors, but he is not a hotel man and he would be the first to admit this.
But he has made his wishes in this caretaking matter quite obvious. He wants
you hired. I will do so. But if I had been given a free hand in this matter, I
would not have taken you on.”

Jack’s hands were clenched tightly in his lap, working against each other,
sweating. Officious little prick, officious little prick, officious—

“I don’t believe you care much for me, Mr. Torrance. I don’t care. Certainly
your feelings toward me play no part in my own belief that you are not right
for the job. During the season that runs from May fifteenth to September
thirtieth, the Overlook employs one hundred and ten people full-time; one for
every room in the hotel, you might say. I don’t think many of them like me and
I suspect that some of them think I’m a bit of a bastard. They would be correct
in their judgment of my character. I have to be a bit of a bastard to run this
hotel in the manner it deserves.”

He looked at Jack for comment, and Jack flashed the PR smile again, large and
insultingly toothy.

Ullman said: “The Overlook was built in the years 1907 to 1909. The closest
town is Sidewinder, forty miles east of here over roads that are closed from
sometime in late October or November until sometime in April. A man named
Robert Townley Watson built it, the grandfather of our present maintenance man.
Vanderbilts have stayed here, and Rockefellers, and Astors, and Du Ponts. Four
Presidents have stayed in the Presidential Suite. Wilson, Harding, Roosevelt,
and Nixon.”

“I wouldn’t be too proud of Harding and Nixon,” Jack murmured.

Ullman frowned but went on regardless. “It proved too much for Mr. Watson, and
he sold the hotel in 1915. It was sold again in 1922, in 1929, in 1936. It
stood vacant until the end of World War II, when it was purchased and
completely renovated by Horace Derwent, millionaire inventor, pilot, film
producer, and entrepreneur.”

“I know the name,” Jack said.

“Yes. Everything he touched seemed to turn to gold . . . except the Overlook.
He funneled over a million dollars into it before the first postwar guest ever
stepped through its doors, turning a decrepit relic into a showplace. It was
Derwent who added the roque court I saw you admiring when you arrived.”

“Roque?”

“A British forebear of our croquet, Mr. Torrance. Croquet is bastardized roque.
According to legend, Derwent learned the game from his social secretary and
fell completely in love with it. Ours may be the finest roque court in
America.”

“I wouldn’t doubt it,” Jack said gravely. A roque court, a topiary full of
hedge animals out front, what next? A life-sized Uncle Wiggily game behind the
equipment shed? He was getting very tired of Mr. Stuart Ullman, but he could
see that Ullman wasn’t done. Ullman was going to have his say, every last word
of it.

“When he had lost three million, Derwent sold it to a group of California
investors. Their experience with the Overlook was equally bad. Just not hotel
people.

“In 1970, Mr. Shockley and a group of his associates bought the hotel and
turned its management over to me. We have also run in the red for several
years, but I’m happy to say that the trust of the present owners in me has
never wavered. Last year we broke even. And this year the Overlook’s accounts
were written in black ink for the first time in almost seven decades.”

Jack supposed that this fussy little man’s pride was justified, and then his
original dislike washed over him again in a wave.

He said: “I see no connection between the Overlook’s admittedly colorful
history and your feeling that I’m wrong for the post, Mr. Ullman.”

“One reason that the Overlook has lost so much money lies in the depreciation
that occurs each winter. It shortens the profit margin a great deal more than
you might believe, Mr. Torrance. The winters are fantastically cruel. In order
to cope with the problem, I’ve installed a full-time winter caretaker to run
the boiler and to heat different parts of the hotel on a daily rotating basis.
To repair breakage as it occurs and to do repairs, so the elements can’t get a
foothold. To be constantly alert to any and every contingency. During our first
winter I hired a family instead of a single man. There was a tragedy. A
horrible tragedy.”

Ullman looked at Jack coolly and appraisingly.

“I made a mistake. I admit it freely. The man was a drunk.”

Jack felt a slow, hot grin—the total antithesis of the toothy PR grin—stretch
across his mouth. “Is that it? I’m surprised Al didn’t tell you. I’ve retired.”

“Yes, Mr. Shockley told me you no longer drink. He also told me about your last
job . . . your last position of trust, shall we say? You were teaching English
in a Vermont prep school. You lost your temper, I don’t believe I need to be
any more specific than that. But I do happen to believe that Grady’s case has a
bearing, and that is why I have brought the matter of your . . . uh, previous
history into the conversation. During the winter of 1970–71, after we had
refurbished the Overlook but before our first season, I hired this . . . this
unfortunate named Delbert Grady. He moved into the quarters you and your wife
and son will be sharing. He had a wife and two daughters. I had reservations,
the main ones being the harshness of the winter season and the fact that the
Gradys would be cut off from the outside world for five to six months.”

“But that’s not really true, is it? There are telephones here, and probably a
citizen’s band radio as well. And the Rocky Mountain National Park is within
helicopter range and surely a piece of ground that big must have a chopper or
two.”

“I wouldn’t know about that,” Ullman said. “The hotel does have a two-way radio
that Mr. Watson will show you, along with a list of the correct frequencies to
broadcast on if you need help. The telephone lines between here and Sidewinder
are still aboveground, and they go down almost every winter at some point or
other and are apt to stay down for three weeks to a month and a half. There is
a snowmobile in the equipment shed also.”

“Then the place really isn’t cut off.”

Mr. Ullman looked pained. “Suppose your son or your wife tripped on the stairs
and fractured his or her skull, Mr. Torrance. Would you think the place was cut
off then?”

Jack saw the point. A snowmobile running at top speed could get you down to
Sidewinder in an hour and a half . . . maybe. A helicopter from the Parks
Rescue Service could get up here in three hours . . . under optimum conditions.
In a blizzard it would never even be able to lift off and you couldn’t hope to
run a snowmobile at top speed, even if you dared take a seriously injured
person out into temperatures that might be twenty-five below—or forty-five
below, if you added in the wind chill factor.

“In the case of Grady,” Ullman said, “I reasoned much as Mr. Shockley seems to
have done in your case. Solitude can be damaging in itself. Better for the man
to have his family with him. If there was trouble, I thought, the odds were
very high that it would be something less urgent than a fractured skull or an
accident with one of the power tools or some sort of convulsion. A serious case
of the flu, pneumonia, a broken arm, even appendicitis. Any of those things
would have left enough time.

“I suspect that what happened came as a result of too much cheap whiskey, of
which Grady had laid in a generous supply, unbeknownst to me, and a curious
condition which the old-timers call cabin fever. Do you know the term?” Ullman
offered a patronizing little smile, ready to explain as soon as Jack admitted
his ignorance, and Jack was happy to respond quickly and crisply.

“It’s a slang term for the claustrophobic reaction that can occur when people
are shut in together over long periods of time. The feeling of claustrophobia
is externalized as dislike for the people you happen to be shut in with. In
extreme cases it can result in hallucinations and violence—murder has been done
over such minor things as a burned meal or an argument about whose turn it is
to do the dishes.”

Ullman looked rather nonplussed, which did Jack a world of good. He decided to
press a little further, but silently promised Wendy he would stay cool.

“I suspect you did make a mistake at that. Did he hurt them?”

“He killed them, Mr. Torrance, and then committed suicide. He murdered the
little girls with a hatchet, his wife with a shotgun, and himself the same way.
His leg was broken. Undoubtedly so drunk he fell downstairs.”

Ullman spread his hands and looked at Jack self-righteously.

“Was he a high school graduate?”

“As a matter of fact, he wasn’t,” Ullman said a little stiffly. “I thought a,
shall we say, less imaginative individual would be less susceptible to the
rigors, the loneliness—”

“That was your mistake,” Jack said. “A stupid man is more prone to cabin fever
just as he’s more prone to shoot someone over a card game or commit a
spur-of-the-moment robbery. He gets bored. When the snow comes, there’s nothing
to do but watch TV or play solitaire and cheat when he can’t get all the aces
out. Nothing to do but bitch at his wife and nag at the kids and drink. It gets
hard to sleep because there’s nothing to hear. So he drinks himself to sleep
and wakes up with a hangover. He gets edgy. And maybe the telephone goes out
and the TV aerial blows down and there’s nothing to do but think and cheat at
solitaire and get edgier and edgier. Finally . . . boom, boom, boom.”

“Whereas a more educated man, such as yourself?”

“My wife and I both like to read. I have a play to work on, as Al Shockley
probably told you. Danny has his puzzles, his coloring books, and his crystal
radio. I plan to teach him to read, and I also want to teach him to snowshoe.
Wendy would like to learn how, too. Oh yes, I think we can keep busy and out of
each other’s hair if the TV goes on the fritz.” He paused. “And Al was telling
the truth when he told you I no longer drink. I did once, and it got to be
serious. But I haven’t had so much as a glass of beer in the last fourteen
months. I don’t intend to bring any alcohol up here, and I don’t think there
will be an opportunity to get any after the snow flies.”

“In that you would be quite correct,” Ullman said. “But as long as the three of
you are up here, the potential for problems is multiplied. I have told Mr.
Shockley this, and he told me he would take the responsibility. Now I’ve told
you, and apparently you are also willing to take the responsibility—”

“I am.”

“All right. I’ll accept that, since I have little choice. But I would still
rather have an unattached college boy taking a year off. Well, perhaps you’ll
do. Now I’ll turn you over to Mr. Watson, who will take you through the
basement and around the grounds. Unless you have further questions?”

“No. None at all.”

Ullman stood. “I hope there are no hard feelings, Mr. Torrance. There is
nothing personal in the things I have said to you. I only want what’s best for
the Overlook. It is a great hotel. I want it to stay that way.”

“No. No hard feelings.” Jack flashed the PR grin again, but he was glad Ullman
didn’t offer to shake hands. There were hard feelings. All kinds of them.





