#Act 1

## Scene 1
_Solinius is the Duke of Ephesus. The scene opens in a jail house in Ephesus,
where Solinius is delivering a sentance to Aegeon, a weary Merchant of
Syracuse._

### The situation between Ephesus and Syracuse is explained to Aegeon by Solinius
"Proceed, Solinus," spoke the Merchent of Syracuse named Aegeon, "to grant me
my verdict, and by the death sentance all of my woes will end."

To this Solinus, being the Duke of Ephesus, replies: "Merchant of Syracuse,
your pleading is pointless, I am not one to bend our laws. The hostility and
discord which has come lately from the bitter offenses your duke made to our
merchants, our well-dealing countrymen who wanted coin to pay their ransoms
and payed instead with their blood due to his strict laws, have removed any
pity we might feel for our harsh treatment. For, since the strife has risen
between your rebellious people and ours, we have in our sacred law decreed
among the Syracusians and ourselves that no merchants should travel between our
squaballing towns. And even more, if any born at Ephesus be seen at a
Syracusian mart or fair, or if a Syracusian born comes to the bay Ephesus, he
is sentenced to death and his goods are confiscated to the Duke's keeping
unless a thousand marks can be given to quit the penalty and ransom him. Your
goods, valued at the highest possible rate, cannot amount to more than a
hundred marks, and therefore by our laws you are condemned to death."

Having been given the argument for his death penalty, Aegeon, the merchant of
Syracuse on the land of Ephesus, his tone somber, replies, "Yet this comforts
me, when you carry out your sentence, my woes will end likewise with the
evening sun."

### Aegeon gives the tale of the events that led him to his situation
_Aegeon speaks of his wife, his twin sons, his adopted twin sons, and their
doings that led to shipwreck and seperation for many years. When his son wishes
to seek his twin brother, Aegeon cannot refuse and searches for many years
before landing himself here, condemned to death._

Perhaps intrigued by his prisoners willingness to accept the sentence so
easily, the Duke inquries of the merchent, "Well, Syracusian, give me the short
version of the reason why you left your native home and came to Ephesus."

Aegeon sighs, as if a great burdon were placed on him. After a brief moment of
silence, he parts his lips and begins to recount his tale. "A heavier task
could not have been given to me to recount my unspeakable griefs, but so that
the world my know that my end was brought by nature and not by criminal
offense, I will recount what my sorrow will allow me to.

"I was born in Syracuse, and married to a happy woman, not happy from me, but
perhaps she would have been if our luck had not been bad. I lived with her in
joy, and our wealth increased by prosperous voyages I often made to Epidamnum,
a neighboring city, until my agent died, and the great care of all my random
goods now fell to me and drew me away from the kind embrace of my spouse.

"We were parted for less than six months before she, almost fainting under the
pleasing punishment of pregnancy that women bear, had made provisions to follow
me, and soon she arrived safe where I was. She was not there long when she
became the joyful mother of two healthy sons, who strangly looked so like
eachother that they could not be distinguished except for their names. In that
same hour, in the same place of birth, another poor woman delivered her burden,
also male twins, alike.  Because their parents were very poor, I bought those,
and brought them up as attendents to my sons. My wife, being overtly proud of
her two boys, kept insisting we return home, and relectantly I agreed.

"Alas, too soon we stepped on a homeward boat! We had sailed a league from
Epidamunum before the winds and tides of the sea gave any indication of danger.
But soon we did not have much hope, for in that stormy darkness I could only
see a little, but that was more than enough to know that we were doomed to die
there. I myself would have gladly embraced death, but the continued weeping of
my wife, who also saw our impending doom and lamented the death of her sons
(who also wept innocently only because she was) forced me to seek to delay our
death.

"Here is what we did (and we had no other option since the sailers sought for
safety from the boat and fled on life-boats, leaving the sinking vessel to
us); my wife, concerned for the younger of our twins, had fastened him to a
small spare mast, one that sea-faring men provide for this exact sort of
situation, and with him one of the adopted twins was bound, while I was tending
to their brothers. Having secured all four children on the mast like so, my
wife and I secured ourselves on each end and, floating straight as we let the
currents take us, we were carried towards Corinth, or at least we thought so.

"Eventually the sun, always beating on the earth, broke through the storm that
had caused us our troubles, and at the benefit of that glorious light, the
seas became calm, and we discoverd two ships from far making their way to us,
one of Corinth, and the other of Epidaurus. But before they came to us..."

Aegeon trailed off, looking in the distance as he mentally thought of the rest
of his tale with sorrow and horror. "Oh! I do not wish to speak any more, you
can gather the rest of the story from what you know!" he remarked in a sort of
immature fit.

At this interjection, Solinious the Duke replied, "Nay!, continue old man, do
not cease your tale so. We may give you pity even though we will not give you
pardon."

Aegeon chuckled. "Oh, had the gods given us pity, I would not have later called
them merciless to us! Before the ships were ten leagues from us, we had run
across a mighty rock, which the waves brought us violently on, and our mast was
split at the impact, and in this unjust seperation fortune had left to both of
us alike something of favor and something of sorrow.

"Of my wife, poor soul, was burdened with lesser weight but not lesser woe, as
she was carried with more speed under the wind; best we could tell those three
were taken by the fishermen of Corinth. Eventually another ship came to us, and
they knowing their luck in rescuing us, gave hearty welcome to us their
ship-wrecked guests. We would have given chase to the fishermen of Corinth and
taken my wife and children from them, but our vessel was too slow, and being
unable to catch them we instead turned our course homeward.

"Now you have heard how my bliss was taken from me, and by these misfortunes
my life has been prolonged so I can tell sad stories of my own troubles."

The Duke sat intently, taking in the story of this merchant. After a moment, he
spoke, "For the sake of those you sorrow for, do me the favor of recounting in
full what has befallen both your wife and yourself from that point until now."

Aegeon, weary but not overcome, gave a deep sigh and continued his
recollection. "My youngest boy, the one I care for the most, at eighten years
began to question me of his twin brother, and asked me most insistently if his
attendent (who remember, was alike to him in that he was also in loss of his
brother, knowing only his name) might accompany him on the quest to find them.
I wished also to see him, so I accepted the risk of potentially losing the son
I loved.

"Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece, roaming through the borders of
Asia, and coasting home now I have come to Ephesus. Though I am without
hope of finding him, I would loathe to leave this place without looking, as I
would look in all places that have men. But here must end the story of my life;
and happy I would be in my timely death if my travels could yield the news that
they live."

### Solinius retains the sentence on Aegeon, but gives him a day to procure the funds
The Duke furrowed his brow at this tale, taking in all that the merchant from
Syracuse had said. After a silence and reflection, the Duke Solinius of Ephesus
rose and gave his proclament, "Unfortunate you are, Aegeon, whom the fates have
cursed you to bear the extremes of great misfortune! Now, trust me, were it not
against our laws, against my crown, my oath, my dignity, (which princes could
not overcome even if they so desired), I would make myself advocate for you.
However, since you are appointed to death, and a sentence once given cannot be
taken back due to the intregrety of our legal system, I will do my best to aid
you in what is in my power. Therefore, merchant, I'll limit you to this day to
find yourself help by whatever beneficial fortune you may find. Talk to all the
friends you have in Ephesus, beg, or borrow, to come up with the ransom, and
live. If you cannot within this time, you are doomed to death."

The duke paused for a moment and made eye contact with the merchant. For a
moment, the duke thought he might have seen a glimmer of hope in those eyes,
but Aegeon remained silent and docile. The duke stood up to finish his
statement. "Gaoler, take him into custody."

"I will, my lord," spoke the Gaoler as he gave acted out the orders with his
usual discipline and routine. The Gaoler took Aegeon the merchant by the arm
and began to carry him away.

Aegeon muttered to himself as he was taken away. "Hopeless and helpless do I go
my way, only to prolong my lifeless end."

