# Act 1 Scene 2

We now turn to the son named Anitpholus of Syracuse, who is also searching for
the other half of his family, but did not get caught in Ephesus as a
Syracusian. He is with his step brother named Dromio, and a friend, someone
only known as First Merchent.

The trio enter a mart in Ephesus. As they try and walk around without being
suspected, the merchant speaks up: "Therefore, say you are from Epidamnum, or
else our goods will be confiscated. This very day a Syracusian Merchant is
apprehended for arriving here, and not being able to buy out his life,
according to the statute of the town, will die before the weary sun sets in the
west."

The merchant stops and ponders a sec. Then, reaching in his pocket, he reveals
some coin: "There is your money that I had to keep," he said, raising the coin
to Antipholus.

Antipholus thought for a moment, and answered the merchant as such: "Go bring
it to the Centaur, an inn where we will stay." He turned to Dromio, "And stay
there, Dromio, till I come to you. It will be dinner time within the hour, and
until then I'll view the manners of the town, evaluate the traders, gaze upon
the building, and then return and sleep in my inn, because due to the long
travel I am stiff and weary."

Antipholus paused, and looking finally at Dromio, says, "Run along now!"

Dromio, a bit taken aback by the manner in which Antipholus addressed him,
mutters a bit under his breathe as he goes off: "Many men would take you at
your word, and indeed run along with so hefty a sum of coin." He runs off.

Antipholus watches him go off as he mutters to his merchant friend: "A trusty
villian he is, sir, that very often when I am dull with care and melancholy
will lighten my humor with his merry jokes." After pausing and addressing the
merchant more directly, "Well, will you walk with me around the town before you
go to the inn and dine with me?"

The merchant replys: "Unfortanately, I have been invited by other merchants, Of
whom I hope to make much benefit; I beg your pardon. At Five o'clock, please, I
will meet with you upon the mart, and see you until bed time from then. For
now, my present business calls me."

Antipholus, a bit taken aback but not too insulted bids him off as well:
"Farewell till then. I will go lose myself, and wander up and down to view the
city."

"Sir, I leave you to your content," the First Merchant said as he went on his
way.

After a moment, Antipholus stops and begins to think to himself: "He that leave
me to my own content leaves me to the thing I cannot get. I am to the world
like a drop of water in the ocean that seeks another drop, who, falling there
to find his fellow brother, unseen, inquisitive, disperses himself in that
ocean. In the same way I lose myself in my unhappy quest to find my brother and
mother."



