# PART ONE





## Chapter 1

1

The Salinas Valley is in Northern California. It is a long narrow swale between
two ranges of mountains, and the Salinas River winds and twists up the center
until it falls at last into Monterey Bay.

I remember my childhood names for grasses and secret flowers. I remember where
a toad may live and what time the birds awaken in the summer—and what trees and
seasons smelled like—how people looked and walked and smelled even. The memory
of odors is very rich.

I remember that the Gabilan Mountains to the east of the valley were light gay
mountains full of sun and loveliness and a kind of invitation, so that you
wanted to climb into their warm foothills almost as you want to climb into the
lap of a beloved mother. They were beckoning mountains with a brown grass love.
The Santa Lucias stood up against the sky to the west and kept the valley from
the open sea, and they were dark and brooding—unfriendly and dangerous. I
always found in myself a dread of west and a love of east. Where I ever got
such an idea I cannot say, unless it could be that the morning came over the
peaks of the Gabilans and the night drifted back from the ridges of the Santa
Lucias. It may be that the birth and death of the day had some part in my
feeling about the two ranges of mountains.

From both sides of the valley little streams slipped out of the hill canyons
and fell into the bed of the Salinas River. In the winter of wet years the
streams ran full-freshet, and they swelled the river until sometimes it raged
and boiled, bank full, and then it was a destroyer. The river tore the edges of
the farm lands and washed whole acres down; it toppled barns and houses into
itself, to go floating and bobbing away. It trapped cows and pigs and sheep and
drowned them in its muddy brown water and carried them to the sea. Then when
the late spring came, the river drew in from its edges and the sand banks
appeared. And in the summer the river didn’t run at all above ground. Some
pools would be left in the deep swirl places under a high bank. The tules and
grasses grew back, and willows straightened up with the flood debris in their
upper branches. The Salinas was only a part-time river. The summer sun drove it
underground. It was not a fine river at all, but it was the only one we had and
so we boasted about it—how dangerous it was in a wet winter and how dry it was
in a dry summer. You can boast about anything if it’s all you have. Maybe the
less you have, the more you are required to boast.

The floor of the Salinas Valley, between the ranges and below the foothills, is
level because this valley used to be the bottom of a hundred-mile inlet from
the sea. The river mouth at Moss Landing was centuries ago the entrance to this
long inland water. Once, fifty miles down the valley, my father bored a well.
The drill came up first with topsoil and then with gravel and then with white
sea sand full of shells and even pieces of whalebone. There were twenty feet of
sand and then black earth again, and even a piece of redwood, that imperishable
wood that does not rot. Before the inland sea the valley must have been a
forest. And those things had happened right under our feet. And it seemed to me
sometimes at night that I could feel both the sea and the redwood forest before
it.

On the wide level acres of the valley the topsoil lay deep and fertile. It
required only a rich winter of rain to make it break forth in grass and
flowers. The spring flowers in a wet year were unbelievable. The whole valley
floor, and the foothills too, would be carpeted with lupins and poppies. Once a
woman told me that colored flowers would seem more bright if you added a few
white flowers to give the colors definition. Every petal of blue lupin is edged
with white, so that a field of lurins is more blue than you can imagine. And
mixed with these were splashes of California poppies. These too are of a
burning color—not orange, not gold, but if pure gold were liquid and could
raise a cream, that golden cream might be like the color of the poppies. When
their season was over the yellow mustard came up and grew to a great height.
When my grandfather came into the valley the mustard was so tall that a man on
horseback showed only his head above the yellow flowers. On the uplands the
grass would be strewn with buttercups, with hen-and-chickens, with
black-centered yellow violets. And a little later in the season there would be
red and yellow stands of Indian paintbrush. These were the flowers of the open
places exposed to the sun.

Under the live oaks, shaded and dusky, the maidenhair flourished and gave a
good smell, and under the mossy banks of the water courses whole clumps of
five-fingered ferns and goldy-backs hung down. Then there were harebells, tiny
lanterns, cream white and almost sinful looking, and these were so rare and
magical that a child, finding one, felt singled out and special all day long.

When June came the grasses headed out and turned brown, and the hills turned a
brown which was not brown but a gold and saffron and red—an indescribable
color. And from then on until the next rains the earth dried and the streams
stopped. Cracks appeared on the level ground. The Salinas River sank under its
sand. The wind blew down the valley, picking up dust and straws, and grew
stronger and harsher as it went south. It stopped in the evening. It was a
rasping nervous wind, and the dust particles cut into a man’s skin and burned
his eyes. Men working in the fields wore goggles and tied handkerchiefs around
their noses to keep the dirt out.

The valley land was deep and rich, but the foothills wore only a skin of
topsoil no deeper than the grass roots; and the farther up the hills you went,
the thinner grew the soil, with flints sticking through, until at the brush
line it was a kind of dry flinty gravel that reflected the hot sun blindingly.

I have spoken of the rich years when the rainfall was plentiful. But there were
dry years too, and they put a terror on the valley. The water came in a
thirty-year cycle. There would be five or six wet and wonderful years when
there might be nineteen to twenty-five inches of rain, and the land would shout
with grass. Then would come six or seven pretty good years of twelve to sixteen
inches of rain. And then the dry years would come, and sometimes there would be
only seven or eight inches of rain. The land dried up and the grasses headed
out miserably a few inches high and great bare scabby places appeared in the
valley. The live oaks got a crusty look and the sagebrush was gray. The land
cracked and the springs dried up and the cattle listlessly nibbled dry twigs.
Then the farmers and the ranchers would be filled with disgust for the Salinas
Valley. The cows would grow thin and sometimes starve to death. People would
have to haul water in barrels to their farms just for drinking. Some families
would sell out for nearly nothing and move away. And it never failed that
during the dry years the people forgot about the rich years, and during the wet
years they lost all memory of the dry years. It was always that way.

2

And that was the long Salinas Valley. Its history was like that of the rest of
the state. First there were Indians, an inferior breed without energy,
inventiveness, or culture, a people that lived on grubs and grasshoppers and
shellfish, too lazy to hunt or fish. They ate what they could pick up and
planted nothing. They pounded bitter acorns for flour. Even their warfare was a
weary pantomime.

Then the hard, dry Spaniards came exploring through, greedy and realistic, and
their greed was for gold or God. They collected souls as they collected jewels.
They gathered mountains and valleys, rivers and whole horizons, the way a man
might now gain title to building lots. These tough, dried-up men moved
restlessly up the coast and down. Some of them stayed on grants as large as
principalities, given to them by Spanish kings who had not the faintest idea of
the gift. These first owners lived in poor feudal settlements, and their cattle
ranged freely and multiplied. Periodically the owners killed the cattle for
their hides and tallow and left the meat to the vultures and coyotes.

When the Spaniards came they had to give everything they saw a name. This is
the first duty of any explorer—a duty and a privilege. You must name a thing
before you can note it on your hand-drawn map. Of course they were religious
people, and the men who could read and write, who kept the records and drew the
maps, were the tough untiring priests who traveled with the soldiers. Thus the
first names of places were saints’ names or religious holidays celebrated at
stopping places. There are many saints, but they are not inexhaustible, so that
we find repetitions in the first namings. We have San Miguel, St. Michael, San
Ardo, San Bernardo, San Benito, San Lorenzo, San Carlos, San Francisquito. And
then the holidays—Natividad, the Nativity; Nacimiente, the Birth; Soledad, the
Solitude. But places were also named from the way the expedition felt at the
time: Buena Esperenza, good hope; Buena Vista because the view was beautiful;
and Chualar because it was pretty. The descriptive names followed: Paso de los
Robles because of the oak trees; Los Laureles for the laurels; Tularcitos
because of the reeds in the swamp; and Salinas for the alkali which was white
as salt.

Then places were named for animals and birds seen—Gabilanes for the hawks which
flew in those mountains; Topo for the mole; Los Gatos for the wild cats. The
suggestions sometimes came from the nature of the place itself: Tassajara, a
cup and saucer; Laguna Seca, a dry lake; Corral de Tierra for a fence of earth;
Paraiso because it was like Heaven.

Then the Americans came—more greedy because there were more of them. They took
the lands, remade the laws to make their titles good. And farmholds spread over
the land, first in the valleys and then up the foothill slopes, small wooden
houses roofed with redwood shakes, corrals of split poles. Wherever a trickle
of water came out of the ground a house sprang up and a family began to grow
and multiply. Cuttings of red geraniums and rosebushes were planted in the
dooryards. Wheel tracks of buckboards replaced the trails, and fields of corn
and barley and wheat squared out of the yellow mustard. Every ten miles along
the traveled routes a general store and blacksmith shop happened, and these
became the nuclei of little towns, Bradley, King City, Greenfield.

The Americans had a greater tendency to name places for people than had the
Spanish. After the valleys were settled the names of places refer more to
things which happened there, and these to me are the most fascinating of all
names because each name suggests a story that has been forgotten. I think of
Bolsa Nueva, a new purse; Morocojo, a lame Moor (who was he and how did he get
there?); Wild Horse Canyon and Mustang Grade and Shirt Tail Canyon. The names
of places carry a charge of the people who named them, reverent or irreverent,
descriptive, either poetic or disparaging. You can name anything San Lorenzo,
but Shirt Tail Canyon or the Lame Moor is something quite different.

The wind whistled over the settlements in the afternoon, and the farmers began
to set out mile-long windbreaks of eucalyptus to keep the plowed topsoil from
blowing away. And this is about the way the Salinas Valley was when my
grandfather brought his wife and settled in the foothills to the east of King
City.





