# The dialouge of Seth and Cain

## Author's preamble
For most works, a preamble should not be neccesary, and the inclusion of one
would indicate some sort of incompletness of the author. If the author must
take time out of the readers life to tell them what he is about to tell them,
it is usually the sign of a poor writer.

But in this case, since the source material is so sacred to some individuals, I
must give a few words about what this is, and what it is not.

I am not recounting historical facts about things that happened six thousand
years ago. I am not placing any significance to these stories any more than I
placing significance on Shakespeare, or on Bach. This story is the result of a
psycholgoical experiment.

I asked myself, "If Cain and Seth were to meet, what would they talk about?"

And so, I told myself that they would talk about their commonalities, notably,
their parents. What this does is it allows me to write and re-write the Adam
and Eve story from many points of view within one dialouge.

Beyond being an intellectual exercise in story telling masterbation, what it
does is it allows me to work with each individual story on it's own, and then
to place it together with the rest to create the most complete picture of the
Garden of Eden that I can imagine in my head.

I also want to make one thing clear. In this story, there is no one "correct"
interpretation. After reading this, one might be left with the feeling that
they have no further insight into anything about anything when it comes to Adam
and Eve. In fact, you might even say that what I wrote is something of an
incoherent mess, and that it should be discarded as mere "Christian
Fan-fiction." If you think so, then I can't convince you otherwise, but what i
want to say is that the story is the story, and anything else that you would
like to discuss about the story could be one way of looking at the story.

But I don't want to get to caught up my own ass here. At the end of the day,
I'm just a guy that wrote the Adam and Eve story from too many different
angles, and felt compelled for whatever reason to compile them all together
into one coherent narrative. The point is, I, as the writer, am not even
omniscient of "what actually happened" within my own story, so neither should
the reader. Instead, this is just the story that I know, that came to me as if
in a dream, that I then used to build this narrative.

Enjoy.

## 1. The Eden of Eve

Our story begins with the birth of a child named Seth. Seth was born to a man
named Adam and a woman named Eve. As far as Seth was aware, he was an only
child. Or at least, he thought he was the first child.

Seth grew up as any child of the time might. Of course, as an infant, Seth
developed as regularly as infants might. He learned how to do everything that
he needed to know how to do at the right times, and as he grew to learn to walk
and talk and reason with his parents, he started to learn about the world
around him.

Some of the earliest memories that Seth has are of learning to herd the sheep,
and harvest the crops at the farm of his parents. His father did most of the
sheparding work, and his mother did most of the farm work. Seth would help each
of them in their own time, as they required.

As Seth grew in age, so did he mature in his understanding of the world around
him.

One day, just like any other day in that time, Seth was helping his mother
harvest the crops because it was the season for harvesting, and when the end of
the day began to approach, Seth's mother addressed him.

"Seth," Eve began. "I greatly appreciate your help with these crops. You're
service here is most appreciated."

"Of course, mother," Seth replied. "I'm always happy to help."

Seth was around eight years of age when this occured.

"Come, let's finish for the day. Join me in the hut, I would like to tell you a
story."

Seth, after he finished shearing off the last of the crops that he was
gathering for the day, stowed away his farming tools, and made his way inside
the cottage his mother told him to meet her in, and met her there.

Inside, his mother had began to brew some tea. She took it out, and handed it
to Seth.

"Seth," Eve began. "Let me tell you the story of how your father and I came to
be."

Seth graciously accepted the tea, and began to sip from it.

"You see, up to this point, I am sure you are thinking that your father and I
were born, just like you were, and that we each have parents of our own, who
conceived of each of us just as we have conceived of you."

Seth paused for a moment before he replied. "I haven't thought about it much,
but now that you mention it, I have always assumed you had a mother and father
just like I do. Are you here to tell me that this is not the case?"

Eve slowly nodded her head in agreement. "Yes, Seth. Your father and I agreed
that when you were old enough, we would tell you the story of how we came to
be. I have decided that you are old enough, and so I will tell you know the
story of the Garden of Eden."

Eve took her seat and began to settle in with her tea. She began her story.

"So as I said, both me, and your father were not born in the same way that you
were. Your father and I, well, we are both the first male and the first female
ever to exist on this planet earth."

Seth took in the information, but wasn't sure what to make of it just yet. Eve
continued.

"You see, the earliest that your father or I can remember is to a faraway
place, some place full of light, and glorious sound, that fills your every
sense with pure joy. The first thing both of us remember after that is being in
a garden together, with the bodies we have now, standing next to eachother,
naked.

"I was greatly confused when I first saw your father. Mind you, at the time I
did not know that he would be your father. In fact, I remember both him and I
being greatly confused. The first thing I remember was your father asked me,
'Who are you?' to which I replied, 'I don't know, and who are you?' and he
replied, 'I don't know'

"So obviously, both of realized that the other was in similar predicament.

"But we quickly came to realize that all around us was a beautiful garden. Only
a brief moment after this realization, both your father and I heard a voice
from the sky. It told us...

"'I am Yahweh, creator and giver of life. You are my creation, each of you made
perfectly in my image. You are to explore the garden I have made for you, and
name all of the living beasts on the ground and the birds of the air and the
fish of the water and the trees with their fruit. After you have named these
things, you are to have dominion over them, and consume them for your
nourishment. All of these things I have made for you. However, there is one
plant that you shall not eat of. The mushrooms of awakening, which grow in the
center of the garden, you shall not eat of, for they are forbidden from you to
eat. But all else is yours to enjoy.'

"So Yahweh spoke to your father and I. Your father's immediate reaction was to
ask a question of Yahweh, but when there was no immediate answer, he turned to
me, and said, 'Did you hear that voice?'

"Of course, I had heard the voice, and replied to him, 'Yes, I did. Did you
hear it too? What did it tell you?'

"At this point, both your father and I corraborated our stories. We both came
to an understanding about what we had heard.

"So, your father and I began our lives together. We became as two fawns, each
finding the other for the first time. We would spend days roaming the garden,
seeing the amazing and fanciful things that were there to behold. We would swim
in the lakes, and name the fishes that swam under us as we did. We would run
through the meadows, and identify the beasts of the trees, and the flowers of
the fields. Your father loved me, and I loved him. It was a truly joyous time
to be alive."

Eve stopped her story for a moment. She looked over at Seth and saw that he was
completely entranced.

"Oh, but look at me, I caught myself daydreaming. How silly of me."

Eve continued her story. "Well, one day, your father and I were visited by an
angel, the angel Raphael. He told us the dangers of one who fought against
Yahweh in the wars of the angels in heaven. His name was Lucifer, also called
satan, and he was said to have been outcast to a place called Pandemonium,
along with all the other traitorous angels that fell with him. We asked him
questions about the garden, about our creator Yahweh, and also some other
things, and Raphael answered our questions as best he was able.

"So having been warned of Satan, your father and I decided on our course of
action. Your father thought that it would be wise if he and I stayed together.
But I argued that if we were to change our habits, then Satan had in some way
already won. Your father did not like it, but we agreed to continue to live our
lives fearless of this fallen angel that Raphael told us about.

"Oh, if only I had listened to your father, things might not have turned out
this way. I tell you, one day, when I was gathering berries in the shrubs of
the garden, I saw slither by my feet a snake. Now, snakes were nothing new to
me at the time, I had seen a snake before, but then this snake walked up to me
on it's four legs and looked me squarely in the eyes. Then I tell you, Seth,
the snake began to speak to me. It said,

"'Ahh, hello there. It is a rare day that a snake such as myself runs across
such a beautiful creature as you. The sight of you gives me the greatest
pleasure any snake could ever know.'

"Of course, I was startled at this. You see, Seth, while I had seen a snake
before, I had never seen a snake actually _talk_ to me before.

"I replied, 'Oh my, a talking snake! How ever did you learn how to speak?'

"'Oh, how, you ask?' the snake replied. 'Well, I only ate of the mushrooms of
the center of the garden, and from them I gained the knowledge to speak. Come
with me now, you should try some.'

"Of course, I was wary. Immediately I told the snake, 'No, my creator named
Yahweh told me to never eat of the mushrooms of the center of the garden. I
shall not disobey him.'

"And then the snake replied, clever as he is, 'Ah, but you see, I come from
Yahweh as well. He has sent me to tell you that it is now time for you to eat
of the mushrooms of the center of the garden. Come with me, and partake of
them.'

"The snake then began to slither away towards the center of the garden where
the mushrooms were, and me, still entranced by the idea of a talking snake,
followed it. You see, Seth, I reasoned that I could follow it, but I didn't
have to actually eat the mushrooms.

"So I followed the snake to the center of the garden. When I got there, there
was a great tree, and wrapped around the tree, the snake had coiled itself all
the way to the top. Then, from the top of the tree, the snake lowered it's
head, and said to me, 'Eve, from words of Yahweh himself, I instruct you to eat
of the mushrooms of awakening, so that you may awake from your sleep and gain
the knowledge of all that there is to know in this world!'

"Of course, I had no reason to disbelieve that the snake was not sent by
Yahweh, so I gathered some mushrooms from the base of the tree, and ate them.

"'Good' the snake replied. 'Now, take some and go to your husband Adam. Yahweh
requests that he eat of the mushrooms of awakening just as you have.'

"So I gathered some of the mushrooms, and began to make my way back to our
cottage.

"When I arrived at our place, I waited for your father to return from hunting.
When he returned, I said to him, 'Oh Adam, I have wondourous news for you.
Yahweh has spoken to me and has instructed me that we are to eat of the
mushrooms. I have gathered them and brought them here.'

"At this, your father turned white, and after he gathered himself, he asked,
'You have not eaten of the mushrooms, have you?

"When I told him that yes, I had eaten the mushrooms already, it was then that
he told me what he had learned earlier that day.

"He said, 'Oh, no, my innocent, naive, wife. The snake that told you to eat of
the mushrooms of awakening did not come from Yahweh. I have only just now
finished speaking with Raphael. He came down to me and found me to tell me that
Satan himself has entered the garden disguised as a snake, and that we need to
be aware that as long we do not obey his commands he is powerless against us.
But now, you have already obeyed his words, and so now he has power over us.'

"I looked back at your father somberly. I began to weep.

Eve paused for a moment. Seth could see that she had a tear in her eye in that
moment of simply retelling the story.

"Your father," Eve continued, after gathering herself for a minute. "Bless him,
your father then said, 'I do not want to fall, but I fear that now that you
have fallen it is only a matter of time before I do as well. I do not resent
you for being deceived by the serpent, if I were in your place I may have done
the same. And if that were so, I know you would have the decency to share in
the fall with me. Therefore, I will fall with you, so that we may both
participate in this together.'

"With that, your father took the mushrooms from my hands as I was sobbing, and
ate of them. After he did, we looked at eachother, and saw that the other was
naked, and we were ashamed, so we hid ourselves.

"It wasn't until a bit later that we heard the voice of Yahweh again. He asked
us 'why are you hiding?' and we replied, 'we are hiding because we are naked
and ashamed.'

"Yahweh sighed, and told us, 'Indeed, if you are ashamed of your nudity, than
the fallen one has come to you, and I am too late. You have eaten of the
mushrooms of awakening, and that which is awoken cannot be put back to sleep.
Leave now, you are exiled from my garden. From this point forward, you are to
till the ground for nourishment, and gather the livestock for sustenance. You
are to labor for your living, and pay your dues for your transgression. Leave
this garden, and never return.'

"So Yahweh spoke to us. Shortly after that, we were address by the archangel
Michael. He came to us, and annonced to us, 'I am teh archangel Micheal. I am
here to escort you from the Garden of Eden and in to the land of the living.
This will be your last moments here, and you are never to return.

"We understood the words of the archangel. He escorted us to the gates of the
garden, and instructed us to walk outside of them. Behind us, he sealed the
gates and locked them with seven total locks. Then, seven angels came down from
heaven, and received the key to each lock, and each left individually back up
to heaven with the lock in hand. After this display of angelic prowess was
concluded, Michael turned to us.

"Michael began, 'Now, Adam, go forth. Be fruitful, and multiply. For your kind
will surely have a great history on this planet. But forever will you be one
step removed from your creator Yahweh, because in this place he cannot
interfere. Fear not, though, for in time, Yahweh will send his son, to come
down from heaven and live as one of you. Through his actions he will save
mankind from your original sin.'

"So Michael instructed us. And that concludes the story of the Garden of Eden
as I experineced it."

Eve finished her story and took a long look in to Seth's eyes. She could see
that he was falling asleep, so she asked him, "How did you like the story,
Seth?"

Seth, now being asked a direct question, opened his eyes suddenly, and said,
"No mom, I wasn't falling asleep, it's a great story!"

Eve laughed, and said, "Good Seth. Well, you've had a long day with me, you
must be tired. I will leave you here for the night so that you can have great
dreams for the morning. Good night, Seth."

With that, Eve kissed the forehead of the exhausted Seth, and layed him down on
the bed that was in the cottage. She left, and extinguished the candles as she
did. She made her way back to the main house, where Adam was waiting for her to
join him in bed.

## 2. The truth, retold

Seth awoke that morning feeling rejuvinated and ready to return to his parents.
When he did, the welcomed him back with open arms as they always do and they
continued to live out their lives. Much of their days were spent tending to the
livestock or cultivating the farms, and as Seth continued to age, he began to
understand that he would be the successor of all that his parents owned. As
such, he continued to maintain a sense of responsibility when it came to
understanding how to manage the farms and the livestock on his own without the
aid of his parents.

And so he learned from each of them how to maintain all of the land that Yahweh
had given them.

Years went buy. In those years, Seth had many more conversations with both his
father and his mother about various. Most times, the conversations were about
what had occurred in the day, or in the state of the farms. Seth had also heard
the Garden of Eden story from his father, in that, and his father's version was
much like his mothers.

Then, when Seth was twelve years of age, after he and his father had finished
herding the sheep and the livestock for the day, his father paused as he and
Seth were returning tools to their proper place, when Adam said to Seth, "Come
with me, let's walk."

When Seth had finished putting up his equipment, he followed his father out the
door and in to the plains.

After they had walked for some minutes, Adam spoke up.

"So I am afraid your mother and I have not been entirely honest with you over
these years. We agreed that when you were old enough, I would tell you the
story about your brothers."

Seth was confused. "But I don't have brothers. What are you talking about? I am
your only child, am I not?"

Adam looked deeply into Seth's eyes. "No, I tell you, you are not. The reason
you do not know your brothers is because I great tragedy took place before you
were born. Let me now tell you of the tragedy of Cain and Abel."

So Adam began the story of Cain and Abel as he understood it.

"After your mother and I were exiled from the garden of Eden, we took Michael's
words to heart. He told us to be fruitful and multiply, and so we did. Our
first child was your brother Cain.

"Cain was a great child, and your mother loved him very much. From the moment
he was suckling her breast, he was with her as she was farming. His first word
was, 'Crop' and he learned when he was two how to handle the farm equipment
with the help of his mother. He was born and raised greatly by his mother, and
he became a great farmer because of it.

"Many years later, your mother and I decided to bear a child again. This time
we conceived, and your brother, Abel, was born. Cain was a teenager as Abel was
an infant, and did not take kindly to competing with Abel for the attention of
his... well your... mother."

Adam paused, and looked Seth in the eyes before continuing his story.

"Because of Cain's jealousy, as soon as Abel was finished breastfeeding, your
mother handed him off to me so that I could raise him while she gave her
attention back to Cain. I took the responsibility of raising Abel, just as she
had taken the responsibility of raising Cain.

"I taught your brother Abel everything I knew about gathering livestock. He
became a natural shepard. In fact, it was even Abel's idea to form a
relationship with a particular breed of dog that was surprising proficient at
being trained to gather sheep with little fuss. Abel was truly a great
sheaperd, and he greatly surpassed me in his abilities."

"What happened to them, my brothers, I mean?" Seth asked.

"Well..." Adam began to trail off. "There is no easy way to put this, so I will
just lay it out to you bluntly. Your brother Cain murdured your brother Abel."

Seth looked shocked. "Murdered? But what would compell him to do such a thing?
You must explain."

Adam looked to his son. "You see, Cain was jealous of Abel even after he had
finished breastfeeding from your mother. Abel grew up to be a talented and
proficient shepard, and all he knew how to do was gather crops with his mother.
He resented us for raising him as he did, and he accused us of favoring Abel
over him when it came to things like love and affection.

"Your mother and I thought it might just simply be a phase, that as both he and
Abel grew older, he would come to be more understanding of his brother. But he
did not. In time, he only grew more resentful, and in his resentment he brought
himself to hatred. Over the years, I saw him transform from a happy farmer to a
bitter young man, and all the while he continued to curse both us and his
brother for his position in life.

"It was one harvest, when we were gathering the goods from both the crops and
the livestock at the same time and making a sacrifice to yahweh, that your
brother finally acted out. During the sacrifice, I said, 'Thank the lord for
our son Abel, that he has gathered these sheep here today to give thanks and
sacrifice to our lord Yahweh.'

"To this, Cain replied, 'But what of my sacrifice of wheat and barley? Does
Yahweh not appreciate those things as well?' And Seth, I told him, 'But we do
not need your sacrifice, your brother's is more than adequate.'

"At this, something inside of Cain changed. I saw it happen in real time. He
began yelling at me. He grew menacing, and began shouting at me. I would tell
you everything he yelled at me, but I must be honest with you Seth when I tell
you that I don't remember the words that he said. It's been over twenty years
since this happened, so I am foggy on the details."

Adam paused and looked up at Seth. "Are you following me so far."

Seth nodded. Adam continued his story.

"Anyway, after Cain was finished yelling at me, he started yelling at his
brother. Cain had gotten upset with Abel before, but not like this. This was
something else entirely.

"Your mother, seeing that what was happening to Cain was surely not healthy,
attempting to interfere. She stepped between Abel and Cain, and told your
brother Cain, 'Young man, you must lower your voice and cease threatening your
brother Abel in this way this instant. You are not to speak to him like that at
any point, much less in the presence of our lord Yahweh in a time of sacrifice.
Confess remorse for your actions and pray to the Lord for forgiveness so that
we may resume our ceremony.'

"Of course, your mother's decision to interfere was the correct what, but then
what happened next surprised both of us. Cain began to yell at his mother. He
called her terrible names, and began to defile her with his words as he
blasphemed the Lord God in front of his mother and everyone there. Again, you
must forgive me, I don't remember the details, but as soon as he started
yelling at his mother, I decided to step in.

"'Cain,' I told him, as I got between him and his... your... mother. 'You are
to cease blaspheming the Lord's name in this place, and you are to apolgize to
your brother for your behavior.'

"At this, Cain looked at both of us. I tell you, I remember vividly, something
of a serene calm seemed to come over him as he turned to both of us and said,
'Mother, father, I am supremely sorry for my actions, I don't know what sort of
devilry has overcome me. Oh my, I have just realized what I have done and what
I have said, and I have acted so immature. Please, both of you, forgive me for
this, I did not mean to tell you how I felt in this way.'

"Your mother and I both forgave him, and then he continued. 'Please, leave me
alone with my brother Abel so I might make ammends with him as I have made
ammends with you.'

"So, your mother and I seeing a change in heart in our child, decided to leave
that place so that Abel and Cain might reconcile."

Adam paused for a moment, and looked back at Seth.

"Well?" Seth asked, "What happened?"

Adam looked back at his son. "Seth, there was no way for your mother or I to
know what would happen next."

Adam paused again, and looked into Seth's eyes. "Son, this is the time when
Cain slew your brother Abel. I don't want to get into the details, because the
manner in which your brother Cain destroyed and defiled the corpse of your
brother Abel is beyond words."

Seth and Adam stopped where they were walking. They had ended up walking to the
top of a mountain, where they could both see the sunset in the distance. The
landscape stood out to both of them burnt orange under the setting sun.

"Suffice it to say," Adam continued after a breif pause, "when your mother and
I had heard of what your brother Cain had done, we were all together alarmed,
furious, deeply saddened, and greatly troubled. The most immediate danger was
the threat that Cain posed to your mother and I. Immeditaly I had to take
action.

"I lunged on to your brother, my son Cain, and I pinned him down, and tied him
up. With his arms behind his back, I told him this. I said, 'You are my son,
your mother and I raised you, and I will not bring myself to kill you for this
evil that you have committed. But know this. You are never to set foot on my
land or my farms ever again. You must find your own farms, and your own land,
and live for yourself. Because you are never welcome to on my property ever
again.'

"With that being said, I untied him cautiously, and your mother and I watched
as he walked away from this land, never to be seen again by any of us."

Adam looked again at Seth. The sun was almost nearly set, and both Adam and
Seth were beginning to lose vision of eachother in the darkness that was
emerging.

"Let us make our way back to the house, there is not much more to the story."

"Is my brother Cain still alive somewhere?" Seth asked.

"I don't know," Adam replied. "I believe so, but I can't know for sure. I am
certain that we have not seen him near this property, so your mother and I are
inclined to believe that he at least obeyed us in exile and has not yet
returned.

"After Cain left, we took your brother Abel and took his body and brought it to
the alter and gave it to God. Your mother and I, after some time, came to
remember our responsibilty as given to us by the Archangel Michael, and decided
to have a third child. That child was you, Seth."

Seth looked back at his father. He could barely see him in the night sky, but
he saw his silohette as they made their way back to the cottage.

"Your mother and I decided to raise you together this time. We agreed that
after you were done breastfeeding, you would have as much time with me as you
did with her. So far, we feel it is working out."

Seth agreed. He enjoyed the relationship he had with both his mother and his
father. He wouldn't trade his existance for anything.

"You are a good child Seth, and it's a great tragedy what happened to your
brothers. Your mother and I wanted you to know when you were ready."

"Will I ever meet Cain?" Seth asked.

"Oh, I would say not," said Adam. "I cannot overstate how vile some of the
things that he said after he killed your brother were. I dare say that he was
truly posssessed by the lord Lucifer himself to do the things that he did. It
is tragic that the Devil has found his way in to our lives so long after our
fall in the Garden of Eden, but alas, we must continue to show our faith in
Yahweh that this is all part of his great plan. If you ever see your brother,
you should assume that he is dangerous and cunning. It is not worth the risk to
interact with him."

Seth pondered this for some time. Suddenly, as they made their way back to the
cottage, Seth realized that he was dreadfully tired, and was nearly ready to
collapse on the path that he and his father were walking.

Adam picked up Seth and carried him to the cottage. There, he lay Seth down,
kissed him on the forehead, and said, "Good night, my son. May your dreams
reveal to you the truth as I have told it to you."

With that, Adam closed the door as he left the cottage, and made his way back
to the house, where Eve was waiting for him to join her in bed.

## 3. Seth's Demons

When Seth awoke the next morning, he walked outside to find his mother working
on the farms.

"Good morning mother," Seth annonced across the way as he stepped out of the
cottage.

"Good morning, son," Eve replied as she continued working the farm equipment.

Seth got ready, and began to help her with the equipment.

"So father told me about my brothers," Seth said out loud to his mother.

"I know," Eve replied to her son. "Your father and I agreed that your were
ready to hear the story. If there is anything you want to know, you can always
ask."

Seth paused before he replied, "I think father covered it pretty well. I just
want to know. What was Abel like?"

Eve paused. "Well, he was a great shepard, much like your father is, and much
like you are becoming. Your father and I both loved him very much."

"And what about Cain?" Seth asked his mother.

Eve paused. "We loved your brother Cain very much as well. We loved them both."

Seth left the conversation at that.

A couple more years went by.

In those years, Seth continued to grow. He gained knowledge about the farms
from his mother, and skills in shepherding from his father. He continued to
help them both maintain the land, and uphold the livestock.

When Seth was fourteen years of age, he got an idea in his mind. During dinner
with both his mother and father there, he posed a proposition to them.

Seth began, after they had finished eating dinner for the day. "Mother, father,
I have something I want to ask of you."

Adam and Eve put down their silverware. Eve spoke up, "What is it Seth? What is
it you want to ask of your father and I?"

"Well," Seth began, "I have been doing some thinking, and well, both you and
father have seen other regions besides this farm. Not only have you both seen
the Garden of Eden, but you have roamed the lands extensively before you have
setlled here, where the land is ripe and the livestock is plentiful.

"But I have lived here my whole life. I have not seen even outside of my own
backyard, much less have I seen anything as fantastical as the Garden. I wish
to go on a pilgramage, so that I might see the land around us, and come to
discover what else the world might have to offer."

At this, Adam and Eve looked at eachother. In their eye contact, they spoke an
entire conversation to eachother. After that conversation, Adam turned his eyes
to Seth, and said, "Son, I must tell you, your mother and I are in favor of
this pilgramage. However, we must also warn you that such a thing is very
dangerous, and without the proper precautions, you will be trampled by the wild
beasts of the forest, and be left starving by the lack of reliable nutrition.

"Still," Adam continued, "we want to encourage you on this pilgramage, if it is
truly what you want to do. Nothing but good things can come of this, if we are
to take the proper steps to ensure your safety."

Adam turned back to Eve, and Eve then spoke up. "Oh, my son, Seth, how much you
have grown. Yes, it is at this age that you should go out and see the world for
yourself. How exciting that will be for you!"

So Seth, seeing that he had met the approval of both his parents, planned with
his father the best ways to prepare for his pilgramge, gathering weapons to
defend himself with, and gathering a sack of preserved meat and food to carry
with him for nutrition.

After some days of gathering supplies and preparing himself, Seth made off for
his pilgramage.

"Go, my son," Adam said as Seth was preparing to walk off. "Discover the world
for all it has to offer, that you may see it for what it is."

"Yes," Eve chimed in. "Narrow is the path that leads to salvation, in God, my
son, should you walk through that path."

"Thank you mother, thank you father." Seth told both his parents. "I am
grateful for your permission to attend this pligramage. I will return in my
time. I await to see your faces again."

"And we will await you with open arms," Adam said as Seth hugged both his
father and his mother before heading out.

Seth walked away into the distance as the sun rose behind him. In the dawn of
the early morning he could still see the dew where he placed his feet in the
grass. He made his way with the sun at his back to begin his pilgramage.

After a few days of walking, making camp, eating, and continuing on, Seth began
to grow weary of his journey. So far, all of the scenery had been the same, and
he felt that he was possibly wasting his time doing nothing at all. But he
continued to walk forward anyone, resolving not to give up on the first few
days. He had packed out over eighty days worth of food, so he decided he would
turn around as he approached forty days out, and he was not near the turning
point yet.

After a couple of weeks, though, Seth grew disheartened, and nearly turned
around and made his return journey right then. However, the thought of
returning to his parents after only thirty days seemed defeatist, so he elected
to continue on despite the dullness of it all.

Then, as Seth reached the edge of the forest that surrounded his parents farms,
he hiked his way to the top of a mountain, and looked out over a new crest that
he had just arrived at.

The landscape in front of Seth was swamp as far as Seth could see.

This was the most alive, and vibrant, swamp that Seth had ever seen. In the
water, he saw that there was algea growing with seaweed, along with all sorts
of minnows and amphibous creatures. He saw frogs hopping on lilypads, and toads
eating insects with their long tongues.

Out in the distance of the swamp, Seth was also able to make out something that
looked to him like a small hut.

This new landscape was a lot for Seth to take in. All his life, he had lived in
the farms, with a view of vast meadows and rolling hills to give him company.
Now, on his journey, he had found an entire habitat that he had no idea
existed. Seth was experiencing a truly orginal experience that he had never had
before, and he was doing so without the guidance of his parents.

Frightful, yet very curious, Seth began to make his way down from the summit of
the hill he was on, and in to the water of the swamp. When Seth made it to the
shore where the water of the swamp met land, he slowly placed first one foot,
and then the other, in to the shallow water. When he was confindent that he
could put his full weight in to the ground without falling through, he took
first one step out, then another, followed by a third, until Seth was
confindent enough to begin walking through the swamp. Seth resumed his
pilgramage, now walking through swamp instead of forest.

Seth made himself familiar with his surroundings. He noticed that the few trees
which did grow were covered in this slimy substance that was later to be named
moss, and he also noticed that there were many flying insects that hovered over
the surface of the water which he was hiking through. He also felt by his feet
that sometimes a fish would swim through his feet, which would startle Seth as
he felt an alarming sensation at his ankles. Seth prayed that the fish would
not harm him, and continued walking through the water.

Seth began walking at first with little sense of direction, and as he
eventually became more comfortable in the swamps, he remembered the hut he saw
in the distance as he looked on from the top of the cliff. Seth looked out
again for the hut, but was not able to see it again from the place he currently
stood. Still, he decided that he would make his way in the direction he
rememebered seeing the hut, if nothing else for the sake of having a definite
direction to walk.

Seth continued to make his way through the swamp towards the direction where he
remembered that he saw the hut. As he did, he couldn't help but wonder if his
parents knew about this place at all. His parents had told him about the
Garden, and also about a place that they described to him as "the desert" which
contained nothing but vast ammounts of what they called sand which spanned
endlessly in every direction, but they had not told him about this swamp.

Seth was idly pondering the question of whether or not his parents had ever
seen the swamp before when he was jolted into high alert by a voice that
shouted at him from some distance off.

"You there," the voice yelled at Seth. "What business have you trespassing on
my swamp?"

Seth turned first to his left, then to his right, but he could not identify
where the voice was coming from.

"Answer me." The voice yelled again.

Seth was not sure what to do. "I come in peace," Seth yelled. "I am here on a
pilgramage. I mean you no harm."

Seth heard silence return to him. Seth looked around, first to his left, then
to his right, and he saw no one. Then, Seth looked in front of himself, and saw
a person in front of him.

"Hello friend," the man approached Seth. "If you come in peace, then I must
cordially invite you to join me in my humble abode."

Seth was frozen in place. He was not sure how to respond. Seth looked at the
features of this person that was approaching him. He was tall, well built, but
scarred. He could tell that this man had been in some hardships in his days.
Perhaps he had fought some wild animals.

Seth eventually came to himself, and mustered up a response. "Yes, I would like
that. I saw your hut from the hill up there, and was trying to find it. I am
glad we have met."

The stranger replied, "I see we can agree to be friends, then. Please, follow
me."

Seth followed the stranger in to his hut. When they made their way inside, Seth
was quite impressed with how sophisticated it was. In one corner, the stranger
had arranged an entire brick oven. When they entered the cottage, Seth could
smell the aroma of warm bread being baked.

"There is some land to the south and west of here where I am able to grow some
of the best wheat and barely," the stranger began, as they made their way in to
the hut. "I was in the process of baking some bread when I saw you moving
outside. It is nearly finished now, would you like to try some?"

Seth accepted the offer of the stranger, and received some bread.

"Take this bread and eat. This is the work of my flesh, which I share eagerly
with you. May your stomach forever be full with the bread I have given you."

The stranger also made his way to a barrel that was tucked away in another part
of the hut. Inside of it, the stranger explained, he had been able to prepare
the barley of his fields, and create a strong drink that he like to call
"beer". The stranger offered Seth a glass of it, and Seth agreed to it.

"Take this cup, and drink. This cup is the work of my blood, which I also share
eagerly with you. May your thirst forever be quenched with the with the drink I
have given you."

Seth received the drink, and drank of it as well.

Having now received some bread and enjoyed some beer, Seth was startled back to
reality as Cain broke the silence between the two of them.

"So I have offered you my food and drink, but I have not gotten your name. What
name do you go by, my friend."

In between bites, Seth replied, "My name is Seth. What might your name be."

The stranger looked back at Seth, "What a nice name that is, Seth. My name is
not near so nice. My name is Cain."

Seth froze in his train of thought. Immediately, he threw the bread he was
holding in his right hand to the floor and spat out the beer he was drinking.

"Cain!" Seth exclaimed. "The Cain! I don't suppose the name Abel would mean
anything to you, would it?"

Cain looked back at Seth with a calm but stoic gaze. After some time locking
eyes like that, Cain replied, "The name Abel does mean a quite deal to me,
actually, but I must ask, what might the names Cain and Abel mean to you?"

Seth, however, did not have the mind to reply to Cain's question. Instead, he
said, "Begone, you devil possessed monster! Do not tempt me with your bread or
your barley. I will not let myself be deceived by your trickery as my mother
was!"

"Mother?" Cain picked out the word and began running calculations in his head.
In a short amount of time, he put together the correct puzzle pieces. "But
Seth, calm yourself, we are brothers!"

"You are no brother to me!" Seth shouted. "You killed Abel in cold blood and
insulted both of my parents in front of God and everybody. You are the
possessed reincarnation of the fallen angel Lucifer himself, and you will not
persuade me with your lies or your trickery. Do not attempt any sorcery around
me, because I am aware of your presence, and will not be convinced by your
words."

Cain stared back at a resolute Cain. After some seconds, Cain started laughing.
At first, the laugh was a small chuckle, but after a couple more seconds, the
laughter transformed into a full on belly laugh. Seth stared incredulously back
at Cain as he watched Cain laugh.

"Oh, the incarnation of the prince Lucifer himself." Cain muttered between fits
of laughter. "Oh, if only that were so, I might be so fortunate."

Seth looked back at his laughing brother. "So you admit to being the prince
Lucifer then?"

Cain replied, "Oh, my dear, naive, little brother. Oh how my parents... our
parents... have led you so far astray. What can I say our do to convince you
that I am not the incarnation of the fallen angel Satan himself?"

Seth turned back to his brother. "Father told me to be wary of your deception.
There is no way for me to know for sure that you are not the prince of
darkness, so I must act under the assumption that whatever you have me do could
be to my demise."

Cain chuckled again. "Ah, the principle to be called Pascal's wager, but in
reverse. I see your mental gymnastics has outdone itself, my young brother
Seth. How old are you now? It's been nearly twenty years since I was exiled
from my parents, so that makes you know older than fifteen, if I had to guess."

Cain looked in to Seth's eyes, and Seth looked away, "Is it fifteen exactly
then? Fifteen years old. That would make sense. That is the age I went on my
pilgramage as well. Tell me, even if you still wish to believe that I am the
Lord of Darkness Lucifer himself, will you at least listen to what I have to
say, and then, after I have finished telling you my story, if you still believe
me to be the King of Pandamonium, you are welcome to leave me and never
interact with me again. How is that?"

Seth eyed Cain cautiously. "And give me one reason not to walk out of here
right now and never see you again?"

Cain looked back, "Because deep down, you know that maybe I really am just your
older brother Cain, that I'm not the re-incarnation of Satan himself, and that
stories you have been told about me have been exaggerated and told from a
biased perspective. Of course, if I were Satan, I would certainly convince you
to listen to my story, and I would do so by appealing to your sense of humanity
as I am right now. However, since I am not Satan, I will leave the choice to you.
If you want to listen to my story, then say so, and I will gladly tell you my
tale. But if you do not care to hear my tale of woe, and instead would like to
label me as the possessed reincarnation of the lord of darkness himself, then
we are in agreement that you should leave this place and never return. Either
one works for me. So how do those options sound?"

Seth thought for a moment about where he was. He was silent for several seconds
as he thought through all of the different facts that he knew about where he
was right now. He knew that he had encountered a man that he thought was a
complete stranger only some minutes previous, and in the course of only very
breif and fleeting moments, he has come upon a whirlwind of discoveries that
his brain quite simply was having a difficult time handling. On the one hand,
he cautioned to his fathers warning, that Cain was a dangerous man, and that
everything outside of the space of the known was potentially ready to ensare
you. But then, on the other hand, he thought to the stories that his parents
had told him, and he thought about his great curiosity in regards to his
brothers. His parents had told him about the existance of two older brothers
that were born before him, but Seth had never gotten to meet either one of
them. One of them, he was told, was dead, but the other was sitting right there
in front of Seth, ready to tell his story to Seth. Seth wasn't even entirely
sure what it meant to be possessed by the Lord of Darkness Lucifer himself, and
when he examined the man that sat across from him, he did not see what looked
like anything other than a man eager for the ear of another man. After thinking
through what had happened so far, Seth eventually made a reply.

"Why did you kill Abel?" Seth asked.

Cain smiled, and said, "I am glad you decided to listen to my story."

"Don't for a second think that just because I am listening to your story it
means that I don't still believe you are possessed." Seth snapped.  "Perhaps
that's what led you to kill him. I don't know, that's why I'm asking. I'm still
wary of you, and will at any moment leave here if I suspect that you are the
devil attempting to lure me in to some sort of trap."

"Very well then," Cain returned. "Devil or no, I will tell you my tale of woe."

## 4. What Cain knows of Abel
"So as you know, my young brother Seth," Cain began his story, "I was the first
born of our parents, so named Adam and Eve. Our mother... I remember she was so
beautiful to look upon... she raised me in the farms. By the time I was
walking, I was working the plows and learning how to rotate crops.

"Life was good as I grew up. My mother... our mother... took great care of me,
and our father managed the sheep.

"I was in love with our mother. By the time I was becoming a teenager, I was
beginning to realize that I was developing sexual feelings for my mother... our
mother. Of course, I understood that what I was experiencing was simply
hormones, but regardless, the feeling was there. I knew that if I were ever to
be able to think clearly, I would have to remove myself from my mother. That is
what I did.

"It was when I was about your age that I, too went on a pilgramage. However,
for my pilgramage, I decided to pack with me seven times seventy days worth of
food, nearly a year and a half worth. I saw a great many things on my
pilgramage, a great many things that I will never forget." Cain looked towards
Seth for a moment. "My pilgramage was truly special for me."

"As I returned, there were matters about the universe that I was confused
about. The stories our parents had told me did not seem to fit with what I had
experienced on my pilgramage. Their stories did not seem to match what I saw,
and I wanted to ask them all about it.

"I returned home, and when I did, I was greeted by a father and a mother with a
baby in her arms. The baby was an infant, and the first thing our parents said
to me when I returned was, 'Cain, your mother and I had another child, we named
him Abel.'

"Of course, I looked amicably upon the prospect of a little brother. A sibling
seemed nice, and he could be useful in helping out around the farms. Still,
though, I was excited to tell my parents about my pilgramage, and after they
introduced me to Abel, and putting him to sleep, we talked all about it."

At this point, Cain's demeanor changed. He voice changed from a happy tone to a
more somber one.

"Well, they did not take to kindly to the words I had to say. You see, to me,
their story about how they were "created" by some benelovent being named
"Yahweh" seemed rather far-fetched to me, and the concept of a "perfect garden
named Eden" was something that seemed to me more like a fairy story than it was
an actual place. Especially as I walked around and saw all the varied kinds of
terrain that the world has to offer, I see very little reason why I should
believe that everything was just poofed somehow magically into existance.

"When I explore the world, I see cultures. I see other things, which look like
they've bee put here by other people. I see things like pyrmids, built out of
sand blocks so symetrical that you can't even slide your finger nails between
them. I've seen hanging gardens in babylon, and I've seen a combination of a
clock and a compass at stonehenge. On my journies, I saw all sorts of amazing
beasts and creatures of the land and also I fished and found many sorts of
different kinds of fish, all of which I could skin and eat for nourishment.

"As I was doing all of this, I thought, 'There is simply no way that all of
this was created and has existed for only a short number of years. There is
evidence here of more than thousands of years of evolutionary and archeological
history to be explored and unpacked. The story my parents tell me about their
God and their creator has to be incorrect.'

"I explained all of this to mother and father, but they would not listen. They
told me things like 'Those ideas are only Satan's demons trying to take a hold
of you.' They made me believe that any lack of faith in their invisible diety
they called Yahweh would condemn me to a life of eternal damnation.

"I just had questions that I wanted answers to, but they wouldn't even let me
ask the questions. They were more concerned with Abel than they were with my
questions.

"And so, I returned to helping my mother with the farms. It soon became a
rather sore subject amongst my parents, so I reasoned that in some way I must
be faulty or possessed for having these doubts of their lord creator.

"Ha, to think," Cain put in an aside for a moment, "To think I actually felt
guilty for questioning the stories I was being told. It sounds so absurd to me
now."

Cain and Seth shared a moment of silence together. Seth was actually the one
that broke the silence. "So what happened after that?"

"Oh," Cain returned to reality. "Well, I continued to grow up. Abel and I both
grew up to become adults. As he started to come of age, he became the favored
by the parents. I'm not resentful of him now, but at the time I was quite
jealous of the attention he was receiving, particularly from my father.

"I don't know what mom and dad have told you about Abel and my own upbringing,
but I must say that despite the tragic end that we met together, we got along
rather well. Sure, we had our quablles, as you might expect brothes to do, but
we actually got along quite well.

"You see, ever since I had returned from my pilgramage, I began to protest our
parents rituals one by one. First, I stopped resting so much on the sabbath.
Mind you, I would still rest, but I began doing work on the sabbath, just
because it was forbidden. Our parents did not like it, but I told them it was
important to me that I do it.

"Next, I told them I didn't want to join them in their evening prayer sessions.
This one took longer for me to break free from, because they argued that not
only were the evenings a good time to pray, but they were also a good time to
commune with the family. And that is true. But I told them it was important to
me that I abstain from praying, because to me it seemed that I wasn't able to
connect to God in any way through that practice. And so we agreed on a
compromise, that I would not have to pray with them, but that I would commune
with the family immediately after they finished praying.

"And so, piece by piece, I began to sepreate myself from the rituals that our
parents took part in.

"The ritual that they held most dear to them was sacrifice. 'Paying taxes to
our lord is the greatest responsibility a man can bear.' is something our
father would always say."

"He still does." Seth interjected.

Cain chuclked. "I'm sure he does."

"Regardless," Cain continued. "I didn't want to do these things, and the last
one that I was pushing back on was sacrifice. It seemed wrong to me to waste a
portion of our crop by burning it needlessly in to the sky. Such sacrifices
were entirely valid resources that were going to waste each harvest. After the
sacrifices, as a family we still had plenty of food to nourish ourselves, but I
can't help thinking that more food would have done the family some good during
some rather harsh winters.

"So I expressed this feeling to our parents. During a sacrifice one year, the
four of us gathered to make our sacrifices to God. I brought a portion of the
crop, as I always do, and Abel brought the fattest sheep from his flock.

"When we had all placed our sacrifices on the alter and burned them, my father
then made the statement, 'Oh, great lord in heaven, please accept Abel's
sacrifice, as this lamb is the fattest lamb of his stock, and very deep is this
sacrifice to you. Shine favorably upon Abel's sacrifice this evening.'

"Of course, when he said all of this, I was slightly taken aback, but not
overly so, because I thought the whole ritual was a silly ordeal anyway. But
then, our father turned to me, and said, 'And to my son Cain, please bestow
your Holy Spirit upon him so that he may return to your light, oh Lord."

Cain paused for a moment, and when Seth looked closely, he could see that his
ears were beginning to turn red. Seth also noticed that Cain's facial demeanor
became more upset at this point in time.

"Well," Cain continued, "I decided that I had enough of such nonsense, and
decided to speak back right then and there. I said, 'Father, please spare me
your mysticism. I do not believe in your God, and I do not believe it is wise
to waste our spoils in this manner. I don't want to hear anything more about a
"Holy Spirit" and I don't want to hear you go on about the "Divine Trinity". If
you don't appreciate my work around here, perhaps I should return on my
pilgramage, and leave this place for good.'

"Of course, I was feeling mighty brave, finally standing up to father like
that." Cain paused again, before continuing, "Even though it was twenty years
ago, I remember what I said to him so vividly. I had been stewing on these
words for such a long time, and when I finally said, it felt so sweet that I
remember it exactly to this day.

"Father said, 'If you reject our Lord and Creator Yahweh himself, then my son,
you a truly and deeply lost."

"To that I replied, 'If you reject the world as it reveals itself to you day
by day, and if choose instead to supplant it with an invisible man named
Yahweh, then you are truly and deeply lost.'

"Let me tell you how satisfying it was to see the confused look on father's
face. He didn't know how to reply.

"Unfortunately for me, Abel made a reply. Abel got between me and Father,
and began insulting me about what I was saying. So I turned to Abel, and I told
him, 'Abel, I don't want to hurt you, but this is between me and my father
right now. Do not get in the middle of this.'

"Abel, instead of backing off like a reasonable man would, stood resolutely
between me and father. Abel continued to yell back at me, saying, 'You godless
prick! How dare you defile not only your father's beliefs but my own as well!
Do not ever dare to call my sacrifice of my fattest lamb worthless! Find the
Lord Yahweh and call him your creator or get away from this place!'

"Of course," Cain continued, "I did not take to this outburst all too kindly,
and retorted with something like, 'Of course your fattest lamb is not a
worthless sacrifice, your fattest lamb would make an amazing stew, and it's a
shame now that such potential has gone to waste.'

"And of course, this angered Abel a good deal, and we began to get physical
with eachother.

"But before we threw any punches, mother began to interfere. She said something
like, 'Cain, this is the devil working inside of you. Please, return to your
senses. I understand that you are confused and lost now, but the way to find
yourself is not by staging outbursts like this. Please, son, come to your
senses.'

"And so, with that, my good sense returned to me. In that moment, when my
mother spoke out to me like that, I realized, I was being a complete asshole
in that moment, and everything that had led to those events was my doing.
Regardless of the fact that I thought all of the stories about the Garden of
Eden and the Devil and the Angelic War and everything else were all nonsense,
the way that I was attempting to express that idea to my parents was not
productive towards the life I wanted to live. I saw with utmost clarity, as if
I had a third eye, and was looking on to the alter from the outside, that I was
conducting myself in a manner which was counterproductive to my overall well
being.

"Immediately, as soon as I realized this, I apologized to my mother. I told
her, 'Mother, I am sorry, you are right, I should not be behaving in this way.'
I then turned to my father, and said, 'Father, you are right, my sacrifice is
not as great as Abel's is, and I see every reason why the Lord would look more
favorably upon his than mine.'

"At this point, after I had turned to both of our parents, I then turned to
Abel. I saw that he had hardened his heart towards me. I began to attempt to
apologize, but before I could get barely any words out, Abel inturrupted me
with, 'Don't think for a moment that defiling the Lord's place of sacrifice is
in any way okay.'

"When Abel said this, I looked to Abel, then I looked back to both of my
parents. It was at this point that I asked them, 'Could you leave Abel and I
alone, please? I think we can work past this brother to brother.'

"At this request, mother and father left the room, leaving Abel and I at the
sacrificial alter alone."

Cain paused here. Seth knew how the story went from here, but he still had to
hear it.

"Abel started to yell at me," Cain continued. "He yelled about God, about
Yahweh, about sacrifice, about ritual. He was giving me a good lesson on what
it means to be a child of God.

"I tried to get him to calm down, but he wouldn't. At first, I tried the
agreement approach. I told him, 'Look, I'm sorry I doubted your God, but if it
will calm you down, I will tell you that I respect him and believe that he
exists.'

"Well, once I said this, Abel got even more upset. He saw through what I was
trying to do, and replied, 'Is that what you think my God is? You think Yahweh
is just some sort of trinket that you can choose to believe in or not believe
in as a bargaining chip for my anger? You insult this holy place with your
blaspheming words.'

"Abel went on and on with such drabble. I continued to attempt to defuse the
situation, but it only got worse. Eventually, in something of a last ditch
effort, I said, 'Listen, Abel, I can see that you are clearly upset, for right
now we are going to have to agree to disagree. Tensions are high, and I can see
you are passionate, so how about we each take a deep breath and we'll each
believe whatever we believe for the time being, and we'll come back to this at
a later date?'

"Well, unfortantely, Abel's response to this was, 'You say tensions are high?
Tensions are high all right. Tensions are higher than this roof right now.'
After Abel said all of that. He stepped towards me and threw a punch at me.

"Of course, I was aware that Abel was getting visibly upset, and I was keen to
the fact that his body language was getting more and more tense as the
conversation went on. I was able to notice Abel posture to punch before he
actually threw his fist towards me, and so I was prepared for it.

"I blocked his intial punch, and returned with a left jab of my own, followed
by an uppercut. Abel clearly was not at all prepared for me to return any
punches, and both of my punches landed squarely first on his nose and then on
his jaw that he immediately got knocked out and dropped to the floor."

Cain pasued for a moment as he mentally recalled the scene in his head. Seth
could tell by Cain's facial expression that this was a hard moment for him to
recall.

"I should have gone for a more conservative defense, but my instinct was my
instinct, and what's done is done." Cain bowed his head for a moment of silence
before resuming his conversation. "As Abel fell back from the force of my
punch, the base of his skull landed on the corner of the alter before bouncing
off and hitting the floor. It all happened in such a short span of time. By the
time I saw him falling back, I glanced over to see the alter, and by the time I
realized his head was on a direct path to the corner, I looked over to see his
head already colliding with the alter and smearing it with drips of liquid
blood. The sound of the "thud" I heard when his skull hit the alter was the
most innocuous yet dreadful sounds I have ever heard in my life. It was as if
his head was a watermelon and the alter was an icepick that gutted the insides.

"Immediately, I saw blood start to drain from the wound that was just made. I
knelt down next to him, turned Abel on to his back, and put his head in my
hands. Immediately, my hands started to feel warm as I could feel them becoming
covered with blood.

"With my right hand I continued to hold the bleeding head of my brother, and
with my left I felt his hand. I could already feel the spasms as his injured
brain began sending random signals down the spinal cord and in to all of the
motor neurons. I could feel his entire body seizing in and out as his body held
on to it's last semblance of consciousness. I stood above him and felt helpless
to watch him as his body squirmed in it's dying moments. For what felt like an
entire lifetime, I held my dying brother in my hands as I felt his last breaths
leave his body.

"When there was nothing but a still and lifeless corpse, I slowly raised the
body of my dead brother to the alter, and I said, 'perhaps, if God is there, he
will accept my brother Abel as a sacrifice.'"

Cain smiled before he continued. "Let me tell you, Seth, if there is a God, he
very clearly does not take kindly to sacrifices of your own family members. We
probably could have guessed that one, but now we know for sure."

Cain continued with his story. "After I had placed our brother on the alter, I
made my way back to the house where mother and father had retreated. When I
arrived, Father asked me, 'Where is Abel?' to which I replied, 'I don't know.
Am I my brother's keeper?'

"My father looked at my hand and said, 'Oh, Cain, what have you done? Your
brother's blood cries out to me from the earth! It appears that in your rage
you have slewn your brother!'

"To this, I said, 'Father, please believe me when I say that Abel's rage, not
mine, was his undoing. If he should have only been more calm, I would not have
been required to raise my fist to him.'

"'Raise your fist!' father exclaimed. 'My son, you never raise your fist even
to someone that raises theirs, and this is exactly why. Just how unfortunate
can one punch be before the so called accident begins to look like a deliberate
murder?'

"When father began to accuse me of murder, at first I rejected the idea. I told
him, 'I only raised my fist in self defense, I did not intend to kill him with
my blow.'

"But as I grow older now, I start to see that there is certainly some part of
me that wanted Abel dead in that time. After all, his death has allowed for me
to make a life for myself out here."

Cain paused for a moment, as Seth finally came back to his senses and
remembered where he was and who he was talking to. To his estimation, it had
been something like twenty years since the events that Cain had just described
to him took place. Seth looked around saw that Cain had made quite a life for
himself out here in exile. The hut he was sitting in was very homely, and he
could see that Cain was very conscientious when it comes to gathering and
baking food.

"I could have worked with my parents and Abel over many years to try and
understand our differences, but killing Abel brought me to that end much
sooner."

Cain paused. Seth wanted to say something, but wasn't even sure what to say.
Cain continued.

"Don't get me wrong," Cain resumed. "I never intended to kill my brother Abel.
It was entirely an accident, and a tragic one at that. Abel was a great man,
much greater than me. In fact, I know that I greatly resented him for it at the
time, which only makes his death by my hand look all the more premeditated.
Still, Seth, I swear to you I did not plan his death. It is unfortunate that
you will only ever meet one of your brothers in your life time, I wish you
could have known Abel..."

Cain trailed off. After a long pause, he finally broke the silence between
them.

"So that's my story," Cain told Seth. "Consider me the devil if you would like,
but that is my tale of woe."

## 5. Cain's Demons
Seth wasn't sure what to say at this point. He spent a good ammount of time
simply sitting in the hut of his older brother and absorbing the information he
was hearing.

Cain's version of the story of what happened between him and Abel corraborated
with his Father's story. That means that either Cain either really is just
simply the older brother of Seth, or it means that he's a very well-informed
devil. Seth wanted to be sure, so after he came to himself, he gathered the
nerve to break the silence and speak to his older brother.

"Your story, Cain, has me convinced that you are my brother, and not the devil,
but before I can be totally sure, I must ask you one question."

"Name it," Cain replied casually.

"I want you to tell me about mother."

"Mother?" Cain looked back at his younger brother with a look of slight
confusion. "Why do you want me to describe mother to you?"

"Because," Seth argued, "If the person you describe is anything like the mother
I know, then I will have an easier time believing you are not the devil. So
describe her to me so that you may ease my conscious."

"Very well," Cain began. "Well, what is there to say? I have not seen her in
over twenty years, but I suppose I can reveal to you the thing I do remember
about her.

"When I go back in to my earliest memories, I have this strange feeling of
warmth and redness come to me. It's as if, before I had the capacity to form
words, I still had the capacity to remember sensations, and so I remember the
sensations that I experienced as a child growing up by the breast of our
mother.

"My earliest concrete memories are of working with my mother in the farms. We
would wake up before sunrise, and eat some breakfast with eggs and toast, and
after eating we would go out in the sunrise and tend the fields. In the spring
times, we would plant and rotate crops, and in the fall times we would
harvest."

Cain paused for a moment, as he stopped his words, and formed a picture of Eve
in his head to get a clearer picture.

"Her hair is the most beautiful color, and when you look in to her eyes, it's
as if you can see all the greatest patterns of the world unfold within her
iris. She is loving to her children and her husband, yet stern in her
discipline. At least, that's what I remember."

Cain stopped again, and erased the mental image from his mind.

"But beyond her appearances, she was quite a lovely human being. Always
charming, wise, and educated. She knew how to handle herself in the world, and
I always admired her for that."

Cain paused yet again, before continuing, "Of course, towards the end of our
relationship, I started to disagree with her about the nature of the universe,
and that created some strange tension in our bond. But even in that time, she
still put out this aura of love and kindness that I hold inside of myself still
to this day."

Cain paused for a final time. "I think that about covers everything I can say
about my mother that would resonate with you. Again, I must remind you that I
have not seen her in twenty years, so I might not be able to recall my memory
of her to your complete satisfaction. But still, that is what I have to say of
her. Does this satisfy you?"

Seth looked in to the eyes of Cain. Cain looked back at Seth. Cain could tell
that Seth was still wary.

"How about this. Let me reason with you, and show you why I am not the devil.
What do you say, will you follow my train of logic?"

Seth looked back at Cain. Minutes ago, he would have said absolutely not, but
since Seth was getting to know Cain, he simply remained silent.

"Very well, let me work this out for you," Cain began. "So the first fact is
that, during your journies, you found me. Unlike the story our mom tells about
the snake in the garden, I did not come seeking out you, you found me.

"Second fact, I am indifferent to whether or not you think I am the devil. If I
were, in fact, a devil, I would very much want you to believe that I was not
the devil. But as far as I care, you can believe that I am prince Lucifer, and
I don't care one way or the other.

"Third fact, I have nothing that I want to persuade you of. I would like to
continue to share stories, because you and I both being human beings, are
social creatures, but I am indifferent to whether or not you listen and believe
what I say or not. You can call me a liar and a blashphemer, a devil worshiper,
or any other host of vile names, and I would remain indifferent to your stance.
Call me whatever you want. The devil would care that it is being called the
devil, but I do not."

Seth weighed all of the things that Cain was saying in his head. Eventually,
after all of the whirlwind of thoughts went through Seth's mind, he asked Cain,
"So let's suppose you are simply my older brother Cain, no demonic possession
involved. How did it feel to kill your brother?"

Cain paused, and smiled. Cain looked towards Seth, and saw a change in his
eyes, he went from looking through Cain to look at Cain, and Cain noticed. Cain
noticed that Seth was now looking at him as if he were a person, and no longer
as if he were the devil.

"At first it was rough," Cain answered. "But in time, you come to live with it.
The first three to five years or so were tough. I had to live off the berries
of the land and of the beasts of the forest, it took me time to find a good
place to settle. There were moments where I thought to myself, 'If only I
hadn't have killed him, I wouldn't be in this predicament at all.' But you
quickly learn that such thoughts don't aid in survival, and you keep making a
life for yourself one step at a time."

There was a pause in the room.

"Does that answer your question?"

"I guess." Seth wasn't sure if his question really was answered, but he felt as
though he didn't want to pry further.

After some pause, Cain began, "So, are you convinced now that I am not the
devil?"

Seth thought for a moment. "If you are the devil, it seems as though at the
present moment you mean no harm to me, so I am making the choice to believe you
are not the devil."

"That's good, I like that," Cain agreed.

Cain broke the pause that followed. "So I suppose you are ready to listen to
the rest of my story now?"

"The rest of your story? You are not done?" Seth thought Cain have finished the
story.

"Done? Of course not. My altercation with Abel was but one incident in my life.
I told you of much that I learned whilst on my pilgramage. It has been twenty
years since I have seen the face of another human being. Would you spare me the
curtosey of allowing me to share with you the things I experinced while I was
on my pilgramage?"

Seth replied, "Of course. Recite anything your heart desires to tell me."

## 6. Cain's Eden


## Some quotes.

I have slewn my brother, and so have I added to the original sin of man. I will
forever be remembered as the first to murder another.


