Below is the dialogue of Seth and Cain.

Many people know the story of Cain and Abel. That story has been told through
the centuries as the story about a man that killed his brother. However, there
is a lesser known dialogue that took place between the brothers Seth and Cain.
The brothers never contacted eachother but for this one encounter. The result
of this encounter, though, was not a murder, but instead, a mutual
understanding.  Because of this, this story does not get as much attention as
the Cain and Abel story, but without the Seth and Cain story, the keystone of
understanding this period in mythological folklore is lost. The discussion that
these two brothers had on that day is filled with subtlty and nuance that is
essential to understanding the beginnings of our psychological lives.

It is difficult to know exactly what words were said in the cabin between these
two men. In fact, since the only other humans alive at the time of the
conversation were Adam and Eve, and because neither party kept a transcript of
the words that were spoken, it is nearly impossible to know exactly what was
said. However, we will not let this obstacle deter us, and we will use our
mind's eye as best we are able to analyze the spirit of what was said that day.
Even if we are not able to recreate in exact Hebrew the exact utterances of
each human in the room, we will still be able to approximate a conversation
which says effectively the same thing as the actual words that were spoken.
Since this is not history, that should be enough.

Our story begins with the birth of a child, a child named Seth. As Seth is
learning about the world, he learns that his parents were the first ever humans
to exist on the world, and that he is their only child. His mom told him that
the farm, and all of the crops that it grows, will be his when he grows of age.
It is his responsibility to take up the lineage of the humans.

So of course, Seth learned about farming, and protecting the farm. His mother
would teach him about planting seeds and nurturing crops, and his father would
teach him how to till the soil, and handle the machinary. Seth learned about
the different seasons, about ideal rainfall, and about crop rotation as some of
the most fundamental things in his developmental upbringing. Tending to and
protecting the farm is the number one priority of the entire way of life to
Seth and his parents.

As Seth grows up, he asks questions about the world around them. Adam and Eve
are able to educate him as best they are able. As far as Seth knew, it was only
his mother and his father and himself that lived in the world.

One day, when Seth was old enough, Eve told him about her time in the Garden of
Eden.

"Your father and I don't know how it began," Eve started. "The first thing that
either of us remember is being together in the garden. We don't know where
either one of us came from before that.

"The earliest memory that both me and your father have is that there was a
voice. The voice named itself 'Yahweh' and told us that he was our creator. He
told us that we could eat any of the fruit of the garden except for the fruit
that was born by one tree in the middle of the garden. Yahweh called this
'the fruit of the forbidden tree' and said that we were never to eat of it.

"Well, that was the earliest memory. From there, most of my memory of the
garden is just in gathering berries and sharing time with Adam." Eve began to
look longingly out the window before she continued on her story. "Well, there
wasn't much more beyond that, there needn't be much more. It was pure bliss.
The weather was always nice, and the animals there were so magnificent. There
was once, in a pasture in the garden, a wild stallion, with a full mane and
everything, and I walked up to the Stallion, and he reared on his hind legs,
and stood up to three times my height in all. It then came back down, and took
off running. It was among the most magnificent and beautiful thing that I have
seen a living creature do.

"In other places, the garden was entirely relaxing. I could sit against a tree
near the beach, and look in to the absolutely clear water there and see fish
and algea swimming across. There were large fish, and elegent fish, and schools
of fish. It was a sight to behold.

"Such was our life in the garden." Eve paused for a moment.

"Well, one day," Eve continued. "When I was gathering berries to bring to your
father, I saw a snake slither by me. It was a deep crimson blue color, with
very intricate patterns all on top of its back. It slithered by, and I was so
entranced by it that I followed it deeper in to the forest. I watched as the
snake came to a tree, and began to wrap itself around the tree. I was so
mesmerized by this snake that I just watched it.

"After it wrapped around the tree, it stuck it's head out, and began to speak
to me. It said, 'Oh, Eve, what a beautiful creature you are'

"At this point, I jumped, and I replied, 'Oh, you can talk!' I was quite
surprised, you see.

"'But of course I can talk,' said the snake. 'I can talk just as you can.'

"Of course, I was very confused about how there was a talking snake in the
garden. So I asked, 'How is it that you are able to talk? You are the only
snake that can do such a thing.'

"'Oh, I only ate of the fruit of this tree," the snake replied, "And it gave me
the greatest wisdom and knowledge that I could ever know.'

"It was only just then that I came to realize that the tree that the snake had
wrapped itself around was the forbidden tree. I was a little surpsied by this
sudden realization. Curious though, I asked, 'So just by eating the fruit of
this tree, you were able to learn to speak?'

"'Yes, that's all' the snake said. 'Eat of the fruit, and you will become
wise.'

"At this point, I was very tempted to eat of the fruit then and there, but
before I did, I thought of Adam. I told the snake, 'Oh, I would love to eat of
the fruit, but I don't want to eat it without Adam. I would like for him to be
here to eat it with me.'

"'Don't bother about him,' the snake replied, 'Eat of the fruit, so that your
third eye may be closed no more, and bring the fruit to Adam for him to eat of
it. Bear not your blindness any more, Eve.'

"You see Seth, this serpent, I later learned, was the devil himself. It turns
out, Yahweh had sent the angel Raphael to warn Adam that his adversary, named
Lucifer, would take the form of a snake and tempt one of us into eating of the
fruit, but Adam was not able to tell me about it before the snake lured me to
the fruit. I ate the fruit, Seth. When Adam saw what had happened, he was
distraught, but I handed him the fruit that I had eaten. He accepted it,
because he did not want me to fall alone.

"After this, we heard the voice of Yahweh again. 'Adam, Eve, have you eaten of
the fruit of the forbidden tree?'

"At first, we tried to lie to him, and we said, 'No, we have not, we have
remained faithful to you, and abstained from eating of this fruit which you
have forbidden us from.

"But Yahweh persisted, 'Do not lie to me. I can see all, nothing is hidden from
me. Tell me the truth so that I may know that you are at least honest.'

"Adam then told him everything that happened. He defended me, and blamed
himself for not warning me in time.

"From there, Yahweh instructed us out of the garden, and had his angel Michael
lock the gates to the garden with his divine key. The garden will remain
impossible for us to return to. Your father and I made our way out in to the
world, until we made it to this land. We have been making our life farming
since then."

Eve concluded her story. Seth was very entranced by the whole thing. He had so
many questions for his mother. But before he could ask them, his mother led him
to sleep, and Seth had a good nights rest.

--

As the days go by, Seth thinks less and less about his mothers story.
Everything in the world is fantastical and new to Seth. A talking serpent with
an apple seemed like something that could happen in the world he lived in. Seth
had only lived there for some time, with many things to surprise him about the
nature of existance, so this story did not surprise him any more than anything
else.

Most of Seth's time is spent with his father in the fields. Throughout the
seasons, him and his father would work tirelessly on the farms. In the end of
winter they would plant and cultivate the ground, and they would water and
prune the crops in spring time. Come harvest time, they would gradually take
the crops that were grown and stockpile them for the winter. Then, in the Fall
and the Winter, they would spend their time protecting their crops from animals
and ensuring that the ground remains fertile for the next season's harvest.

Seth was getting to the age now where he would venture out on his own to
various parts of the farm. The land that they had prepared for farming was
large, and there was no gate or fence around it. Seth's parents had constructed
a few cottages around the land that they farmed, so that they may have
different places to stay. Most night, Seth sleeps in the house with his
parents, but as he starts to come of age, he begins to spend more and more time
in some of the other cottages. This is good for the parents as well, since it
means that Seth is able to watch over the cottage and make sure that it stays
well maintained.

One day, as summer was waning and autumn was approaching, Seth and his Father
sat outside on a porch, and shared together a concoction they had conjured up
containing barley and fermented yeast. As they were enjoying this drink
together, Seth asked his father, "Dad, is there anyone out there besides us?"

Adam sat in his rocking chair and looked out to the stars. "Well Seth, your mom
and I have told you about where we came from, and what we know, but we haven't
been entirely honest with you about what happened after we got kicked out of
the Garden of Eden."

Seth took a sip of his barley, and waited for his dad inquizatively.

Adam sat up in his rocking chair. "Seth, I think you're old enough now for me
to tell you what happened with your brothers."

"I have brothers!" Seth was confused and shocked. He had lived the past twelve
years thinking that he was the only child to ever exist.

"Yes," Adam replied, "You do have brothers. Or rather, you had brothers. You
see, one of them is now dead."

Adam settled in to tell the story to Seth. "So when your mother and I had to
leave the Garden of Eden, we knew that some day, our lives would come to an
end. When that happens, there will be no one left to revel in the glory of
God. We saw that we didn't want that to happen, we want there to always be
living things that can understand the glory of God. Because if that dies, then
so do we all. So we decided to have a child.

"We had a child, and we named him Cain..." Adam trailed off, "Well, Cain was a
great hunter. He could protect the farm, and bring back game. We would
sacrifice the fat of the game to God, and eat of the meat. Life was good.

"Some time after your brother Cain had become a full adult, your mother and I
decided to have another child. This one we named Abel.

"Abel and Cain got along very well as children. Cain, of course, being an
adult, helped us in raising him. Cain became something of a second Father to
Abel.

"But then something terrible happened." Adam gave pause for a moment.

"You see, son," Adam continued, "Cain and Abel loved eachother, but they were
very different people. Cain was a gamesman, and Abel was a farmer.  Abel was
much more peaceful than your brother Cain, and saw no need of violence or
killing. One day when he became old enough, Abel confronted Cain. Abel told
Cain that there was no need to kill things as he was.

"Cain and Abel got into a disagreement, and in that disagreement, Cain killed
Abel. It was horrible, it was wrong. When your mother and I learned of this,
and when we saw the body of your brother, well, we weren't sure what to do with
your brother. But based on the things Cain said, and his behavior, it's clear
to us that he must have been possessed or otherwise swayed by the devil.

"We don't know how to exorcise him, but we couldn't bring ourselves to kill
him. The only thing we knew to do was exile him from our house.

"We have not seen him since. We do not expect to see him again. He is probably
alive somewhere, hunting for food and finding shelter each night, but it's
surely a demented existance he must be living under the control of the devil
like that. Your mother and I, we are sad for what we did. We failed Cain, and
so he fell, and the thing that seems least wrong to do is exile him.

"After some years we had you, Seth," Adam finished the story. "We need to
cultizate someone to bring up the lineage of humans, and we are praying that it
is you who will rise above."

This was a lot for Seth to take in. Just a few minutes before, he thought he
was an only child, and now he was learning that he not only had one brother,
but two, and that one of his brothers had killed the other.

--

For a couple of years after that, Seth continued on his life. He thought about
his brothers occasionally, but only as a passing thought, and not anything
more. He continued to maintain the crops, and protect the farm.

When Seth was fourteen, he went up to his parents, and he asked him a question.
"If I were to go out, do you think I could find my brother Cain?"

Adam and Eve glanced at eachother. They were not sure how to respond.
Eventually, Eve gave her response. "I do not think it would be wise to try and
seek out your brother. He is something of a monster, always killing. In fact,
if you were to see him, he might kill you without realizing who you are. It
would be dangerous to get near him."

Adam gave his response. "And besides, what would there be to say? He shows no
remorse for what happened. He can't be reasoned with. He rejects our God. As we
see it, he has been possessed by the devil. He is has fallen to the level of
the serpent in the tree. He cannot be saved."

Seth shook his head, and thanked his parents for their opinion. Still, he
couldn't help but think that his parents were ignoring his question. He asked
if he could find his brother Cain, not if it would be worthwhile. The way his
parents dodged the question made him think that it was possible.

However, he did not know how he would find him. What would he even look like?
He felt uneasy about the way his parents talked about Cain. If he had just so
happen to have been born first, would he have been outcast like Cain was? How
terrible that must be. It was the most terrible thing that Seth could think of.
Perhaps his brother Cain was a murderous monster, but that seemed so foreign to
him that he couldn't help but think that there must be some other reasoning
from Cain.

But still, Seth did not know how he would find Cain.

Fortunately for Seth, Cain found Seth.

One day, when Seth was working in the fields, at the very edge of the farm, he
say a man coming from the forest hail him down.

"Ahoy there!" the man yelled down from the distance. "Do I see a friendly face
in my sights."

Seth was startled at first. He replied to the man as best he could. "Hello
stranger. I see no reason to harm you if you do not harm me."

"That's enough of a friend for me." Cain continued to walk towards Seth. "What
might your name be."

"I'm Seth"

"Ah, Seth, of course. Well, my name is Cain. It's a pleasure to meet you."

Cain raised out his hand, but Seth became dreadfully chilled upon hearing the
name.

"Get away from me now!" Seth exclaimed. "I want you away from me, and I want
nothing to do with you!"

"Whoa there! Easy now." Cain replied, "I mean you no harm. For what reason do
you harbor this adversity towards me?"

Seth straightend his back and faced Cain, "My mom and dad... No... Our mom and
dad told me about you. They told me that you killed our brother and ran away,
never to show your face here again. Tell me, why are you approaching me? Do you
mean to kill me too?"

Cain eyed his brother. "Interesting, so they had another son?" He trailed his
gaze off in to the distance. "Tell me, Seth, I would like to know what Mom and
Dad have told you. Can we go into the cabin, and discuss this?"

Seth thought for a moment. Then he said, "How can I trust you? How do I know
that you're not going to kill me as soon as we get into the cabin?"

Cain gently grabbed Seth's hand in his own. It was soft, and delicate, compared
with his own. "Because if I wanted to kill you, I could do it right now."

At that moment, Seth realized that he was completely helpless to Cain. Cain had
drawn his sword, and had it poised to slice Seth at the blink of an eye.

Cain withdrew his sword. "Please, I don't want to scare you, I am merely making
a point. Now, can we go somewhere more comfortable to talk?"

Seth, having been warmed up to Cain in this way, ushered him into the cabin. In
the cabin, Seth prepared some tea, and they shared some sips of it. It was Cain
who was the first to break the silence between them.

"So you mostly gather crops for mother and father? Do you do anything else?"

Seth wasn't sure how to reply. This was, after all, the first human that he had
ever talked to besides his mom and dad. "Yes, I help them both in managing the
farms. I'm also learning as much as I can from mom and dad about how to take
care of the farms. I'm meant to be the heir of the human race."

Cain scoffed, "Heir to the human race. Some mighty words they are telling us
now." Cain eyed Seth again. "Tell me, do you know about Abel?"

Seth recoiled at such a topic coming up so soon in their conversation. "I know
enough. I know that he was a great farmer, and that you killed him."

Cain laughed. "Well, one of those is true. I always was envious of Abel's
farming ability."

Seth looked back at his brother with an accusatory glance. "And you mean to
tell me it wasn't you that killed him?"

Cain chuckled. "My actions led to his death, but it was certainly not I that
killed him. The horrors of the wild killed Abel. I was merely naive enough to
think he could handle it."

Seth was still unsure what Cain was saying. "Let me hear it then. I want to
know about my brother Abel. What was he like before you killed him?"

Cain laughed, "I tell you that I did not kill him, yet you still accuse me?
Well look at you young Seth! Distrust is a good quality in a man, you will do
well in life. Much better than Abel did. I will tell you about him.

"He was a farming man. He spent all his time out in the farms, plant seeds,
tilling soil, and pruning crops. Every waking moment of his was spent tending
to, or thinking about, the crops. When he was not farming, he was either
eating, or he was sleeping. Even in the night, he would wake up, and check on
his crops. He attended to them with a obsessive level of attention. And the
harvests were the best you could ever dream of. He grew the most full, and
bountiful bread you could ask for..."

Cain started to drift off.

"Why did you kill him?" Seth asked

"I told you, I did not kill him. Let me tell you what happened on that day from
the beginning."

Seth sat, ready to listen to what Cain had to say.

"One day," Cain began, "He and I got to discussing things, similar to how you
and I are right now. We talked about all sorts of things, from the nature of
God, to the manner in which we provide food to the family. As you probably
know, I provided the game, and Abel provided the crops.

"So as we were discussing this, Abel confronted me. He said, 'Cain, I am
morally obligated to tell you that I am against the killing that you partake
in. It think it's wrong to slaughter animals like you do for the mere pleasure
of eating the meat. We have sufficient means to provide more than enough food
to sustain the bellies of our family, as well as the bellies for many families
to come. We do not need to kill any living thing in order to satiate our
hunger. Please, Cain, stop killing animals. It's wrong.'

"So Abel said to me. To which I replied, 'Oh, my naive brother Abel. Yes, I do
hunt game, and yes, it does provide food for the family. But also, my hunting
keeps the family safe. For when you are working on the farms, I am out and
protecting the borders from the wild things that would come and destroy your
crops. You might not see it, but by killing the animals, I am protecting you
and teh family from certain doom.'

"Abel did not like this explanation, and he spoke against it. He said, 'I don't
believe you. I think our family will be able to get along just fine if you
don't kill everything around us. There must be a better way to keep us safe
besides killing everything that enters our farm.'

"I laughed at this idea. Abel had no idea what sort of danger these animals
posed. So I said to him, 'Abel, how about this. How about I take you to the
wild, and I have you confront a bear. When you confront it, you will see that
it is not a living thing, but instead a beast of the wild, and that it is meant
to be killed and taken as game.'

"So Abel agreed, on the condition that the bear was not to be killed.

"So we traveled to the forest, and we found a bear. I said to Abel, 'Look,
there is a bear. Take my weapon, and go confront it.'

"Abel, being indignant as he was, grabbed my sword, and confronted the bear. Of
course, Abel was too weak, and was trampled by the bear. I came up laughing
behind him. With a few quick strokes, I hit the vital points of the bear, and
killed it on the spot. You see, when I was first learning to hunt, I would be
trampled like this, but I always managed to find a way to survive. So I went to
lift my brother up, so that he may stand tall and we might continue our
discussion, but it came to my surprise that, when I went to grab his shoulder,
instead of pulling up my beaten brother from the ground, I found that I was
pulling up a lifeless corpse, dangling in my arms.

"How was I to know that Abel was so weak that a bear attack would outright kill
him? Even as a child, when I was first learning to grapple with animals, I was
never so weak as to let something like a wild beast actually kill me. Such an
idea was foreign to me.

"So now at this point, what was I to do? I held the lifeless corpse of my
brother in my hands. I couldn't hide it, of course, because my parents, ...,
our parents, would quickly wonder where their son had gone. So I did the only
thing I knew to do. I brought our brothers corpse to our parents and told them
what had happened.

"Mom and dad were very upset with me. They blamed me for his death, because
they argued that I could have easily save Abel from being trampled by the bear.
WHen I tried to explain that I was making a point to Abel, and that I couldn't
forsee that he was so weak as to die to a bear attack, they wouldn't have any
of it. They instead told me to stop lying to them, and admit that I killed
them.

"It's a strange thing, being told that you are lying when you are confessing
the absolute truth to the best of your ability. I could not convince them. They
were convinced that I had killed Abel, and that I was making up a story to
cover it up.

"So I was exiled. I left, and I promised them that I would never set foot on
their farm again. I broke that promise today, because I wanted to come see if
they might change their minds, but having run in to you, it plays to my great
advantage that I can make my next move poised from here."

Seth thought for a moment. He wasn't sure to what degree he should believe his
brothers story. He then replied, "So where does that leave you?  After all,
even if you didn't technically kill him, and I'm not saying I totally believe
your story, you were the one that placed him in the position that he died in.
His blood is still on your hands. What do you have to say for yourself there?"

Cain replied again, "As I see it, I can't dwell on what happened in the past. I
could not have known that he was so weak that he could die to a bear, and so
now I understand that not all humans are created with the same facilities as
everyone else. I understand that about you now as well. If only I had known
that about Abel at that point, I would not have told him to fight that bear,
but I could not have known that at the time. And regardless, had I not forced
him into that fight, he would have eventually run into some sort of wild
creature and failed to fight it and die. After all, I could not always be
around him to protect him, that would be silly. The man would have died by a
bear in one way or another anyway."

"And what are you doing now?" Seth asked.

"Now? Now I live my life in the woods. I hunt animals, and eat their meat to
survive. Such is my life in exile."

There was a pause in the room. Seth remained quiet for some time. After some
time, he finally broke the silence, and said, "I can see you justify your
actions now with naivity and innocence, but still let it be known that I am not
so inclined to believe you. In fact, was it not our mother who was decieved by
a sweet tongued serpent, and told to eat of the fruit of the tree of life by
the words of the devil himself. How can I be so sure that you are not decieving
me now in the way that the serpent decieved my mother."

Cain first let out a snort, followed by a chuckle, followed by a full on belly
laugh. "Oh, my sweet sweet Seth. I can garuntee you that I am not a serpent. Do
I slither on the ground like one? I am also not a beast. Do I stand on four
paws and roar?  I am not a bird. I am not a bug. I am not a devil. All of these
things I am not. I am merely a human. Look at me, and feel my flesh. Does it
not feel the same as your own flesh and blood? Listen to me, and hear my words.
Do my words not sound the same as the words of a man? Place your ear to my
heart. Does the heart of a devil beat in the same way as the heart of a human?
I think not. I am no devil. I am but a man, just as you."

Seth looked a little cautious. "How can I be certain that you aren't a devil?
Maybe you are a kind of devil that is able to trick humans into thinking they
are a man. You are the kind of devil that is able to show that it is entirely
like a human, but really, on the inside, it's a devil."

Cain looked visibly confused. He wasn't sure what Seth was saying. "Listen,
Seth. You seem to be convinced I am a devil. Of all the things you should be
worried about our meeting together here, there are way more important things to
talk about then whether or not I am a devil. If you want to believe that I am
somehow the devil, then fine, but please understand that I have done nothing to
indicate that I am the devil in any way, shape, or form, to you right now. Have
I done anything that has made you uncomfortable, or anything to make you think
I am a devil?"

Seth pondered this question. "Well, you did raise your sword at me outside."

Cain laughed, "Yes, and that made you very uncomfortable, didn't it?"

Seth chuckled a little bit. "Yeah, it did make me very uncomfortable. Like,
that's not cool man. I don't know what our parents tried to teach you when you
were growing up, but I know what my parents taught me growing up, and that is,
you don't just go pulling swords on people to make points. So I suppose that,
if you are my brother, you wouldn't go around just pointing swords at people.
That is something a devil would do. So I think I have argued myself into saying
that I do believe, in spite of everything t hat you say, that you are a devil."

Cain just laughed. "So be it then. I am the Devil!" Cain was laughing rather
loudly now. "Here is the story young Seth. When I was exiled from my parents, I
met a crow, and when the crow cawwed three times, on the third caw, I was
transported to the domain of the evil king Lucifer himself. He was seated on a
throne of fire. He tried to capture my soul, but before he could, I killed him,
and took his place! Now I am taking the word of the devil and corrupting all
that I touch with it!" Cain was laughing mighty hard at this point.

Seth wasn't sure whether he should be alarmed, or amused. "Is that story true?
Why should I believe you?"

Cain laughed. "Oh Seth. Let me tell you how much I wish my story were true."
Cain let out another big laugh. "Oh, if that story were true, then that would
mean that I conquered the devil! How amazing that would be. No, Seth, the only
devils I conquered were my inner devils. I am no match for king Lucifer
himself!"

Seth gave out a chuckle. "You know, mom and dad are always talking about the
devil. My mom tells me that devil is really a serpent that convinced her to eat
the apple of the forbidden tree. Is that what the devil is? I don't understand
it."

Cain chuckled. "Oh, no Seth, there might be a devil, but if there is he's
nothing like whatever you would hear in stories."

Seth gave pause. "But the stories my mom tells me have to be true. She wouldn't
lie to me about them, would she? Her stories are so compelling." Seth thought
for a moment.

Cain replied, "Just because a story is compelling in no way makes it true. In
fact, some of the most compelling stories are those that are the most untrue."

Seth gave pause. "So what was it that mom found in the Garden of Eden then? If
it wasn't the devil? What led her to eat the apple of the forbidden tree?"

Cain sat back. "Well, it seems as though we have the stories all mixed up. I'll
try and tell you mom and dad's story, as I've been able to piece it together,
as best I am able."

Seth settled in to his chair as Cain began his story. "I do want to say at the
outset that my version of the story is the best I have been able to put
together from what mom and dad have told me, as well as my own intuition about
what could have happened. My account is in no way infallible, but I'll point
out the key bits as we get to them."

Cain finished and Seth shook his head.

"Good, so let's begin," Cain started.

"So mom and dad lived in a beutiful forest. In their time and travels since
then, they have forgetten where this forest was, and no longer know exactly
where they came from. But they have some memories of living in this forest.

"So while they were living there, our parents were experimenting with new
sources of food. As they were experimenting, they ate many of the fruits of the
forest there.

"In the forest, though, there was one tree that was covered in mushrooms. It
had mushrooms at it's base, mushrooms grew from the trunk, and mushrooms grew
even in the branchs in the leaves.  Eve, our mother, one day saw a serpent
slither towards the tree. As soon as she saw it she was captivated by it. All
of the mushrooms were growing in such beautiful abundance. It was one of the
most beautiful things she had ever seen.

"Of course, she was curious about the mushrooms, and ate of them. Immeditaly,
she started convincing herself of the means by which she came to the tree. She
claims that, after eating the mushrooms, she heard the voice of the devil, and
it was sweet and alluring, and with that voice she lured Adam in to eating the
mushrooms with her.

"When they had both eaten the mushrooms, they both started to realize what they
were and who they are. They started to understand the world for what it is, and
not for what they wanted it to be. However, their minds could not comprehend
the truth that the mushrooms were trying to tell them, so instead they told
stories about how the mushrooms made them feel.

"In time, they have told their stories among themselves (as they have no one
else to talk to about it) for so long now that they are no longer sure which
parts of the story are made up, and which parts of the story are a true account
of what happened. Instead, they just make the claim that everything they
remember about what happened is the true account.

"But let me tell you something Seth. I have eaten these mushrooms as well, and
I can tell you for certain that the experiences you feel while under the
influence of these mushrooms, while very unknown and vast and impactful, is not
real in the same sense that the chairs we are sitting on is real. When you eat
the mushrooms, you start to see and become fantastical things, and these
fantastical things, while they are significant to the person eating the
mushrooms, are not real in the way that our parents would like you to believe."

Seth processed the words for a moment. "But that seems so wrong to me. Mom and
Dad assure me that their account of what happened is the most true account that
they can tell. Do you mean to say that they are lying to me?"

Cain analyzed Seth's question. "No," Cain said, "I'm not saying that they are
lying. What I am saying is that they are only giving you part of the story
without the rest of the bits. Perhaps they think you are not old enough, or
perhaps they've told the story so much that they don't know what's real
anymore. Or maybe they told the story perfectly but you misunderstood exactly
what it meant. Whatever the case may be, you have some incorrect assumptions
about the world that our parents would have you believe."

"But why?" Seth retorted, "Why would my parents want me to believe one thing
when they know it's not true? That doesn't make any sense."

Cain paused a moment. "You're right Seth, you wouldn't think it makes sense.
But tell me this. When I told you my name, you knew who I was. That means that
either mom or dad must have told you about me. But I'm guessing that you didn't
always know about me? Am I right? Was there a time when mom and dad told you a
different story than the one that was true about something that you as a child
could not be possibly aware of?"

Seth was hit by the sudden realization. His parents had lied to him about being
the only people on earth. There was this man, Cain, who was sitting in front of
Seth now. And his parents told him for twelve years that he didn't exist.

Cain was reading the expression on Seth's face. "I can see by the way you've
reacted to my question that the answer to it is yes they did. Think back on it
Seth, back when our parents used to tell you some alternate story about me. Was
that a good thing for you at the time? You were young. I good was it for you to
think that you were the only child ever to have been born into existance. Why,
that probably gave you quite the energy boost. You see, our parents did only
what they thought was best for you. They did the same for me as well, and
well..." Cain trailed off.

Seth replied, "They lied to you about the stories they told as well?"

"No," Cain replied, "No, they fed me the mushrooms when I was a child."

Seth looked back at Cain. "I don't understand. How is that like what's
happening to me at all?"

Cain looked back at Seth. "Oh, you naive boy. You are thinking about eating
like the fruit or the crops. Eating these mushrooms is not like eating of
bread, or of berries. No, eating mushrooms is a journey. It's a journey through
the mind.

"I can take it now, but as a child, I was fed these mushrooms regularly. As I
started to come to an age where I could do things, it became difficult for me
to understand what was real, and what was not. Our parents thought I was
becoming delusional, as I started to come up with ways to test using emperical
evidence which statements were real and which ones were not. My sense of
reality was so twisted that I couldn't understand what was happening in front
of me.

"Now, I haven't eaten mushrooms in a long time. In fact, the last time I ate
mushrooms was after I was exiled for killing Abel. That was before you were
born. They are a transformative tool, but it must be used wisely."

Cain finished his tale.

"Did Abel also eat the mushrooms?" Seth asked.

"No." Cain replied, "No, Abel was what my parents called "unfallen". With me,
they thought having a child that knew the wisdom of the mushrooms would be
beneficial. When they saw that it wasn't the case, they had Abel, and kept him
free from the mushrooms.


