## 6. Cain's Eden

"Let me tell you, Seth, the origins of my understanding of the world around me.

"I, as it seems also, you, grew up believing our parents story. Namely, I truly
and honestly believed that a diety named Yahweh created existance as we know
it, and that our parents, Adam and Eve, were the first woman and the first man
to exist ever.

"But let me ask you, Seth, when you look deeply in to your soul, is that what
you see? Are you able to cooraborate that story with the world you see around
you?"

Cain paused while Seth pondered this for a moment.

Seth began, "I suppose I do, as I see no reason for mother and father to lie to
both me and you as you suggest."

Cain chuckled. "Of course not. You still haven't seen the pattern of their
discussions, have you? You see, everything you understand to be true when you
are born later turns out to be a lie. It's in how we respond to that lie that
defines who we are as people."

Seth looked back at his older brother. He wasn't sure what to make of this
whole conversation.

"Think about it," Cain continued. "Mother and Father both have told you stories
about the world that they originally lied to you about. They hid the story of
how I killed your brother from you until you were much older. They also hid the
story of the Garden of Eden from you, and even though that one is false, they
had you believe something else before they told you that. Mother and Father
have always lied to you about various stories, why would it be so strange that
they have more lies that they have yet to reveal to you?"

Seth thought about it for a moment, and eventually conceded that Cain was
making quite a good point. After all, his parents had every reason to lie to
him, he was still young, and they had more important things to teach Seth, like
how to shepherd the sheep, and how to rotate crops and till the ground. There
might have been many inconsequential details about his parents past that they
weren't revealing to Seth. There was no reason to believe that this wasn't the
case.

Seth thought through the posibilities for a moment. Although he had conceded
the point that perhaps his parents were being dishonest still, in spite of the
fact that they have also been honest to Seth in some ways, he could not think
of a reasonable alternative story for why it seemed as though him, Cain, and
their parents were the only people that existed on the planet.

So Seth asked Cain, "Tell me your version of the story. How did our parents
come to be, and how did this universe come to be?"

Cain looked back at Seth, and laughed. "Well, I would not presume to know how
the universe came to be. If we could answer that question, we could answer a
great deal many others that I have on my mind. But I can tell you how I believe
our parents came to be.

"Look at us, Seth. Compare our anatomy with the anatomy of a monkey. You and I,
and Mother and Father, we are all very similar in the fact that our shape and
form is rather similar to that of an ape. Yes, it is true that we have less
hair on our bodies, and we compensate for this by covering ourselves with
clothing, but it is undeniable that the shape of our bodies, not only the way
we carry our four limbs but also our internal structure of organs and tissue,
we share many similarities with monkies, and in particular, chimpanzees."

Seth was listening to his brother intently, but he wasn't sure where this was
going. Sure, Chimpanzee's were fascinating animals, and Seth had encountered a
couple in his time, but he was'nt sure why his brother Cain was talking about
them now. Still curious, though, Seth let his brother continue.

"Because of our striking similarities to chimpanzee's, my current working
theory is this..." Cain resumed explaining. "Our mother and father were both
the result of a certain kind of chimpanzee eating a particular strain of
mushroom. When this happened, they had something of a religious experience,
which gave them awareness of their own existance. We are the first creatures
ever to become aware of our own consciousness, and it's because of these
mushrooms that we can do it."

Cain paused as he let his statement sink in for a moment. Seth sat in silence.

Seth eventually broke the silence. "But that is silliness. Are you going to sit
there and tell me that we are no different than Chimpanzees? Clearly we are
much smarter and much more sophisticated than those beasts. How can you claim
that we are something so undomesticated?"

Cain replied, "Oh, I think that the mushrooms that Mother and Father ate did a
great deal as far as seperating our perception of existance from our bodies to
our minds. Seth, let me tell you what I found on my pilgramage.

"When I was about the same age as you are now, as I told you, I decided to go
on a pilgramage, much as you have. When I was on that pilgramage, I wandered in
to a forest. In that forest I lived for nearly one hundred days, and for one
hundred days I explored the leaves and the shrubs of the ground for
nourishment.

"As I was experimenting with new food sources in this forest, I came across
mushrooms which reminded me of the mushrooms mother and father told me about in
their story, from the Garden of Eden.

"As I stood there, I thought, 'perhaps I have accidentally wandered in to the
Garden that Mother and Father talk about in their stories, and I have
accidentally stumbled upon the tree that my mother gathered the original
mushrooms of knowledge from.

"So I gathered some of the mushrooms, and I ate of them."

Cain paused for a short moment before continuing. "Seth, let me tell you, what
happened next was the most profound thing I have ever experienced."

Cain stopped talking and there was silence. Seth was sitting in anticipation,
and eventually said, "Well? Continue your story. What were the mushrooms like?"

At this, Cain looked at Seth, and then he said, "It was the most profound
experience I have ever had." Cain began.

"Immediately after I ate them, I resumed walking in the forest, as I returned
to the place where I had made camp.

"That day, I had already gathered some firewood, and I had some meat prepared
which I had removed from my bag and restored.

"As I returned to my camp, I set up a fire, and as I was cooking my meat so
that I may eat it, I began to hear a voice from the fire.

"I don't remember what the voice said to me, but it was not anything like the
language that you and I use today. It was like something else, an entirely new
language that I could somehow understand, but I can't recite to you now.

"After the flames had revealed themselves to me as such, I decided to sacrifice
my food to the God Yahweh, because that seemed appropiate at the time.

"After I did that, though, the next day, after I had gone to sleep, and
experienced the most profound dream that I don't remember of my life, I woke up
with a renewed sense of clarity and purpose. I was no longer the only human
being on this planet to be born of a Mother and Father, I saw myself as part of
something much larger than either myself, or Mother and Father, or any of it.
We were the beginning of a new kind of animal, and by eating the mushrooms, I
was able to understand that Yahweh could not exist in the way that my parents
think he does, but he exists in a totally different and psychological way."

At this, Cain gave pause, and Seth interjected. "That seems like an awfully
strange thing to say. As far as I understand, the diety Yahweh is an actually
diety that exists, and created the world as I see it in front of me. Are you
going to tell me that you don't believe that is true either?"

Cain thought for a moment on the question. "No, of course I don't believe in
the literal existance of Yahweh. What I believe is that the name "Yahweh" is
significant to our parent in some way, and when they pray and sacrifice to
"Yahweh", what they are doing is invoking something inside of themselves,
somethnig that they found by eating the mushrooms, and they are invoking in a
way that even they, themselves believe this invocated psychological entity to
be "real" in the same way that you or I is real."

Seth was clearly uncomfortable by the things that Cain was saying


