So at this point, I think it is important to tell the story of Seth and Cain.

Of course, many people know of the story between Cain and Abel. That one has
been told through the centuries, being most famous as the story of the man that
murdered his brother. However, there is a much more interesting story to be
told between the brothers Seth and Cain. Although they did not interact with
eachother, they had one encounter. In this encounter, the result was not a
murder, but instead, a mutual understanding. Because of this, this story does
not get as much attention as the Cain and Abel story, but without the Cain and
Seth story, the lineage of Seth would not be as prominant, nor as full force as
it became. It is because of this encounter that things began to take the shape
they did as Seth and his descendents began to populate the human race.

It's difficult to know exactly what when on between these two men in the cabin
that they had their conversation. In fact, because it was just the two of them,
and neither one kept a transcript of the exact words that went down, we can
only speculate through vision what might have been said. However, we will not
let this obstacle deter us in our pursuit of the truth, and we will find in our
minds eye the conversation that Seth and Cain had on that day.

Our story begins with the birth of a child. This childs name is Seth. The child
is born to the world, and in the world of this child, there are his parents,
and himelf. As the child begins to grow, he begins to learn how to tend to the
gardens. He becomes skilled at it. He also learns how to defend himself when
creatures attack. In fact, when he was merely eleven, he saw a bear coming to
attack his father as his father was weighed down by the farm equipment, and
could not defend himself. Seth grabbed the nearest sharp farmming tool, and
attacked the bear relentlessly with it. He did not kill the bear, but he warded
it off enough for his father to free himself from the equipment.

As Seth grows up, he asks questions about the world around them. Adam and Eve
are able to educate him as best they are able. They tell Seth that the cannot
remember a time before they existed in the garden. It was as if they were
suddenly brought forth into existance, and the only thing they knew was true
was that a God named Yahweh had put them there, and that they weren't supposed
to eat of a certain tree. Eve told Seth about the serpent that could talk, and
Adam told Seth about his meeting with Raphael.

From this point, they then tell Seth that, after they had eaten of the fruit,
they were fallen individuals. THey could no longer live at peace in the garden.
THey became aware of the evils of the world, and they no longer felt safe. 

"That is why," they stressed, "that if any one with any ill intentions comes to
you and tells you that you can be given the knowledge of good and evil by only
eating something, you should not believe them, but instead you should know that
those words come from the devil himself."

This all seemed reasonable to Seth. THere were no contradictions in the story,
and Seth had every reason to believe them.

Then, one day, Seth asked his parents. "So is it just us in the world? Or is
there someone else?" At this, Adam and Eve both gave a long pause, until
eventually, Adam spoke up. "Son, I think your old enough for us to tell you
what happened with your brothers."

"I have brothers!" Seth was confused and shocked. He had lived the past twelve
years thinknig that he was an only child.

"Yes," Adam replied, "You do have brothers. Or rather, you had brothers. You
see, one of them is now dead."

Adam settled in to tell the story to Seth. "So when your mother and I had to
leave the Garden of Eden, we knew that some day, our lives would come to an
end. When that happens, there will be no one left to revel in the glory of
God. We saw that we didn't want that to happen, we want there to always be
living things that can understand the glory of God. Because if that dies, then
so do we all. So we decided to have a child.

"We had a child, and we named him Cain..." Adam trailed off, "Well, Cain was a
great hunter. He could protect the farm, and bring back game. We would
sacrifice the fat of the game to God, and eat of the meat. Life was good.

"Some time after your brother Cain had become a full adult, your mother and I
decided to have another child. This one we named Abel.

"Abel and Cain got along very well as children. Cain, of course, being an
adult, helped us in raising him. Cain became something of a second Father to
Abel.

"But then something terrible happened." Adam gave pause for a moment.

Eve continued to the story. "You see, son, Cain and Abel loved eachother, but
they were very different people. Cain was a gamesman, and Abel was a farmer.
Abel was much more peaceful than your brother Cain, and saw no need of violence
or killing. One day when he became old enough, Abel confronted Cain. Abel told
Cain that there was no need to kill things as he was."

"Yes," Adam continued, "Cain and Abel got into a disagreement, and in that
disagreement, Cain killed Abel. It was horrible, it was wrong. When your mother
and I learned of this, and when we saw the body of your brother, well, what
more could we do except exile him from our house. It pains us greatly to say
it, but we can't have someone so violent as that living under our roof."

"That is when we had you, Seth," Eve finished the story. "You seem to be the
best of both of your brothers. You can work the fields, and you can defend
yourself if need be. You are to be the one chosen to take up the family when we
die."

This was a lot for Seth to take in. Just a few minutes before, he thought he
was an only child, and now he was learning that he not only had one brother,
but two, and that one of his brothers had killed the other.

After processing the story for a bit, Seth asked, "What happened to Cain? Where
is he now?"

Both Adam and Eve shrugged their shoulders. "We don't know," Eve chimed in. "We
told him to never return to this place again. We can only presume that he is
making a life for himself outside hunting game."

That was the end of the conversation. It was a lot for Seth to wrap his head
around.

For a couple of years after that, Seth continued on his life. He thought about
his brothers occasionally, but only as a passing thought, and not anything
more. He continued to maintain the crops, and protect the farm.

When Seth was fourteen, he went up to his parents, and he asked him a question.
"If I were to go out, do you think I could find my brother Cain?"

Adam and Eve glanced at eachother. They were not sure how to respond.
Eventually, Eve gave her response. "I do not think it would be wise to try and
seek out your brother. He is something of a monster, always killing. In fact,
if you were to see him, he might kill you without realizing who you are. It
would be dangerous to get near him."

Adam gave his response. "And besides, what would there be to say? He shows no
remorse for what happened. He can't be reasoned with. He rejects our God. As we
see it, he has been possessed by the devil. He is has fallen to the level of
the serpent in the tree. He cannot be saved."

Seth shook his head, and thanked his parents for their opinion. Still, he
couldn't help but think that his parents were ignoring his question. He asked
if he could find his brother Cain, not if it would be worthwhile. The way his
parents dodged the question made him think that it was possible.

However, he did not know how he would find him. What would he even look like?
He felt uneasy about the way his parents talked about Cain. If he had just so
happen to have been born first, would he have been outcast like Cain was? How
terrible that must be. It was the most terrible thing that Seth could think of.
Perhaps his brother Cain was a murderous monster, but that seemed so foreign to
him that he couldn't help but think that there must be some other reasoning
from Cain.

But still, Seth did not know how he would find Cain.

Fortunately for Seth, Cain found Seth.

One day, when Seth was working in the fields, at the very edge of the farm, he
say a man coming from the forest hail him down.

"Ahoy there!" the man yelled down from the distance. "Do I see a friendly face
in my sights."

Seth was startled at first. He replied to the man as best he could. "Hello
stranger. I see no reason to harm you if you do not harm me."

"That's enough of a friend for me." Cain continued to walk towards Seth. "What
might your name be."

"I'm Seth"

"Ah, Seth, of course. Well, my name is Cain. It's a pleasure to meet you."

Cain raised out his hand, but Seth became dreadfully chilled upon hearing the
name.

"Get away from me now!" Seth exclaimed. "I want you away from me, and I want
nothing to do with you!"

"Whoa there! Easy now." Cain replied, "I mean you no harm. For what reason do
you harbor this adversity towards me?"

Seth straightend his back and faced Cain, "My mom and dad... No... Our mom and
dad told me about you. They told me that you killed our brother and ran away,
never to show your face here again. Tell me, why are you approaching me? Do you
mean to kill me too?"

Cain eyed his brother. "Interesting, so they had another son?" He trailed his
gaze off in to the distance. "Tell me, Seth, I would like to know what Mom and
Dad have told you. Can we go into the cabin, and discuss this?"

Seth thought for a moment. Then he said, "How can I trust you? How do I know
that you're not going to kill me as soon as we get into the cavern?"

Cain gently grabbed Seth's hand in his own. It was soft, and delicate, compared
with his own. "Because if I wanted to kill you, I could do it right now."

At that moment, Seth realized that he was completely helpless to Cain. Cain had
drawn his sword, and had it poised to slice Seth at the blink of an eye.

Cain withdrew his sword. "Please, I don't want to scare you, I am merely making
a point. Now, can we go somewhere more comfortable to talk?"

Seth, having survived that first encounter with potential death at the mercy of
Cain's sword, let out a sigh of relief. Seth led Cain to a cottage towards the
edge of the farm, near the border of the farm and the forest. In the cottage,
Cain prepared some tea, and a snack for Cain to eat while they sat down. Cain
was the first to break the silence between them.

"So do you gather the crops for mother and father? Is that your day to day
life?"

Seth stumbled a bit at his reply. This was the first human he had ever talked
too besides his parents. He said, "Yes, I do manage the farms. I think I do all
right. Dad seems pleased with the crops we bring."

"Good, that's good." Cain replied. "And you can defend yourself. I saw you
fight off a bear that was going to attack dad."

"Yes..." said Seth. "How do you know about that?"

"Oh, I know more than you probably think Seth. But that one was mere
coincidence. I was roaming in the forest, and I saw the bear wandering towards
the farms. I followed it, but when it crossed the threshold into the farms, it
was no longer in my power to do anything about it. I watched as the bear
approached father, and also as you gathered a tool to defend yourself and fight
it off."

"And you were just going to stand there and let it kill dad? What sort of
monster would do that?"

"I'm not a monster." Cain sneered. "I saw you were able to handle the
situation, so I rested easy. Of course, had you not been there, I would have
been in a moral dilema, but you were there, so my dilema was solved."

"So that's what someone elses life means to you? It's just a moral dilema?"
Seth was visibly upset.

"No." Cain said resolutely. "Not at all." Cain trailed off. "What do you know
about Abel?"

Seth recoiled at the sudden shift in topic. "I don't know much, just that he
was a great farmer, and taht you killed."

Cain laughed. "Well, one of those is true. Abel was a great farmer."

Seth looked back at his brother with an accusatory glance. "And you mean to
tell me it wasn't you that killed him?"

Cain looked out the window. "If I'm being entirely repentive, then yes, I would
say that I killed him. But the horrors of the wild killed Abel more than
anything else. I was merely naive enough to assume he could handle it."

Seth looked curious now. "Tell me your story then. I want to know about my
brother Abel. What was he like before you killed him?"

Cain chuckled, "You see, I have told you that I did not kill him, but yet you
still accuse me? That is actually a good quality in a man, you will do well in
life. Much better than Abel could have. I will tell you about him.

"He was a farming man. He spent all his time out in the farms, plant seeds,
tilling soil, and pruning crops. Every waking moment of his was spent tending
to, or thinking about, the crops. When he was not farming, he was either
eating, or he was sleeping. Even in the night, he would wake up, and check on
his crops. He attended to them with a obsessive level of attention. And the
harvests were the best you could ever dream of. He grew the most full, and
bountiful bread you could ask for..."

Cain started to drift off.

"Why did you kill him?" Seth asked

"I told you, I did not kill him. Let me tell you what happened on that day from
the beginning."

Seth sat, ready to listen to what Cain had to say.

"One day," Cain began, "He and I got to discussing things, similar to how you
and I are right now. We talked about all sorts of things, from the nature of
God, to the manner in which we provide food to the family. As you probably
know, I provided the game, and Abel provided the crops.

"So as we were discussing this, Abel confronted me. He said, 'Cain, I am
morally obligated to tell you that I am against the killing that you partake
in. It think it's wrong to slaughter animals like you do for the mere pleasure
of eating the meat. We have sufficient means to provide more than enough food
to sustain the bellies of our family, as well as the bellies for many families
to come. We do not need to kill any living thing in order to satiate our
hunger. Please, Cain, stop killing animals. It's wrong.'

"So Abel said to me. To which I replied, 'Oh, my naive brother Abel. Yes, I do
hunt game, and yes, it does provide food for the family. But also, my hunting
keeps the family safe. For when you are working on the farms, I am out and
protecting the borders from the wild things that would come and destroy your
crops. You might not see it, but by killing the animals, I am protecting you
and teh family from certain doom.'

"Abel did not like this explanation, and he spoke against it. He said, 'I don't
believe you. I think our family will be able to get along just fine if you
don't kill everything around us. There must be a better way to keep us safe
besides killing everything that enters our farm.'

"I laughed at this idea. Abel had no idea what sort of danger these animals
posed. So I said to him, 'Abel, how about this. How about I take you to the
wild, and I have you confront a bear. When you confront it, you will see that
it is not a living thing, but instead a beast of the wild, and that it is meant
to be killed and taken as game.'

"So Abel agreed, on the condition that the bear was not to be killed.

"So we traveled to the forest, and we found a bear. I said to Abel, 'Look,
there is a bear. Take my weapon, and go confront it.'

"Abel, being indignant as he was, grabbed my sword, and confronted the bear. Of
course, Abel was too weak, and was trampled by the bear. I came up laughing
behind him. With a few quick strokes, I hit the vital points of the bear, and
killed it on the spot. You see, when I was first learning to hunt, I would be
trampled like this, but I always managed to find a way to survive. So I went to
lift my brother up, so that he may stand tall and we might continue our
discussion, but it came to my surprise that, when I went to grab his shoulder,
instead of pulling up my beaten brother from the ground, I found that I was
pulling up a lifeless corpse, dangling in my arms.

"How was I to know that Abel was so weak that a bear attack would outright kill
him? Even as a child, when I was first learning to grapple with animals, I was
never so weak as to let something like a wild beast actually kill me. Such an
idea was foreign to me.

"So now at this point, what was I to do? I held the lifeless corpse of my
brother in my hands. I couldn't hide it, of course, because my parents, ...,
our parents, would quickly wonder where their son had gone. So I did the only
thing I knew to do. I brought our brothers corpse to our parents and told them
what had happened.

"Mom and dad were very upset with me. They blamed me for his death, because
they argued that I could have easily save Abel from being trampled by the bear.
WHen I tried to explain that I was making a point to Abel, and that I couldn't
forsee that he was so weak as to die to a bear attack, they wouldn't have any
of it. They instead told me to stop lying to them, and admit that I killed
them.

"It's a strange thing, being told that you are lying when you are confessing
the absolute truth to the best of your ability. I could not convince them. They
were convinced that I had killed Abel, and that I was making up a story to
cover it up.

"So I was exiled. I left, and I promised them that I would never set foot on
their farm again. I suppose I have broken that promise by stepping here today,
but I am not here to confront our parents. Instead, I just wanted to make
contact with you."

Seth thought for a moment. He wasn't sure to what degree he should believe his
brothers story. He then replied, "So where does that leave you?  After all,
even if you didn't technically kill him, and I'm not saying I totally believe
your story, you were the one that placed him in the position that he died in.
His blood is still on your hands. What do you have to say for yourself there?"

Cain replied again, "As I see it, I can't dwell on what happened in the past. I
could not have known that he was so weak that he could die to a bear, and so
now I understand that not all humans are created with the same facilities as
everyone else. I understand that about you now as well. If only I had known
that about Abel at that point, I would not have told him to fight that bear,
but I could not have known that at the time. And regardless, had I not forced
him into that fight, he would have eventually run into some sort of wild
creature and failed to fight it and die. After all, I could not always be
around him to protect him, that would be silly. The man would have died by a
bear in one way or another anyway."

There was a pause in the room. Seth remained quiet for some time. After some
time, he finally broke the silence, and said, "I can see you justify your
actions now with naivity and innocence, but still let it be known that I am not
so inclined to believe you. In fact, was it not our mother who was decieved by
a sweet tongued serpent, and told to eat of the fruit of the tree of life by
the words of the devil himself. How can I be so sure that you are not decieving
me now in the way that the serpent decieved my mother."

Cain first let out a snort, followed by a chuckle, followed by a full on belly
laugh. "Oh, my sweet sweet Seth. I can garuntee you that I am not a serpent. Do
I slither on the ground like one? I am also not a beast. Do I stand on four
paws and roar?  I am not a bird. I am not a bug. I am not a devil. All of these
things I am not. I am merely a human. Look at me, and feel my flesh. Does it
not feel the same as your own flesh and blood? Listen to me, and hear my words.
Do my words not sound the same as the words of a man? Place your ear to my
heart. Does the heart of a devil beat in the same way as the heart of a human?
I think not. I am no devil. I am but a man, just as you."












my point now being made that the bears are aggressive and
dangerous, only to find that 

I told him to fight the
bear and show me that he was capable like a man to protect the family, and then
he fought the bear and died. He was weak. It was unfortunate. My parents, ...,
our parents argued that I could have protected Abel from harm, but I told them
that he was being indignant, and that I was trying to make a point. I honestly
did not think that he was so weak as to die from a bear when he was armed with
a sword.  It's quite a level of incompetence that I quite frankly did not
realize could exist. So in taht way, Abel killed himself by not being prepared
to fight when he was required."


