1:02

So here we go again, writing about Seth and Cain.

This session I want to start not having read anything that will allow me to get
into the zone of this session. This is for no other reason than that I really
don't want to read my own writing right now, so I am electing not to.

Still though, in order to compensate for this, I must instead go over some of
the things that I have written, so that I can end up at a place where I am
writing a section of my piece. This way, I am not wasting my time.

So with all of that being said, lets very briefly go over the outline of the
whole work, and then very quickly zoom in to the area that I want to focus on
for this session.

So Seth and Cain is obviously a story that I am writing, and as of right this
moment, it is composed of six section, along with a forward (preamble) and
epilogue.

The preamble is merely my own words, author to reader. I use terms like,
"Author" and "Reader" in this part.

The first section is the story of the Garden of Eden as told by Eve, to Seth,
when Seth is 10.

The second section is the story of Cain and Abel, as told by Adam, to Seth,
when Seth is 12.

The third section is the start of Seth's pilgramage when he turns fifteen. He
meets a stranger who he learns is his brother Cain.

The fourth section is the story of Cain and Abel as told by Cain, to Seth, when
Seth is 15.

The fifth section is the story of Cain's exile, and his recovery to his present
status in the swamp.

The sixth and final section I want to begin with the story of Cain's
pilgramage.

I do not know exactly how the story ends at this point.

I can attempt to imagine that I have written everything up to this point, and
that I am ready to write some possible endings.

However, since I am clearly at an impasse when it comes to reaching a point
where I very clearly have not thought through, or figured out, what I want to
happen in the story at this point, it might be prudent to attempt to free write
at this point, and come up with some open brainstorming when it comes to what
should go here.

So that will be the focus of this session. It will be something of a free
writing session where I attempt to come up with ending of Seth and Cain.

So, as I have already talked about, I have come up with an outline for
everything that happens in the story up until Cain reveals to Seth the nature
of his exile, and then the nature of what happened to him on his mushroom trip.

So, the way the ending is going to go, it will come out of Cain detailing out
his mushroom trip to Seth.

Now, I have already talked about this mushroom trip in a past practice session,
but because that was practice, I have not put anything to paper when it comes
to this story.

But, I do want to say that, hwatever may end up being the source for this part
of the story, I want to be clear that, as far as this version of the Seth and
Cain story is concerned, that whatever source does exist is consistent with
what happens here, just for the context of this story, and if in the future I
write some source, and I decide I have to retroactively change something that
happens in the Seth and Cain story to make it fit with what I want Cain to be
in that story, then so be it.

The point is, if I do ever create a source material for the mushroom trip of
Cain, then it will be it's own work, with it's own lore, and it's own universe.
If that story and this story make corraborative sense at some point in the
future, then all the better.

So with all of that being said, I want to get in to a bit about what happens in
the mushroom trip.

As I have said, I have written about this.

The one thing that remains constant to me about this trip is that Cain comes
out of it with a much fuller understanding of what "God" and "Yahweh" might
mean to him.

In order to illustate this, I see two approaches that can be taken.

The first approach, which I am less fond of, but is the more immediately
obvious approach to take, is to actually narrate out a psychedelic experience
as acurately as possible, and to make this something like a "trip sequence".

I like this approach if I had some good psychedelic material to draw from, but
short of a dream or an actual psychedelic experience that will occur in the
future (which I'm not going to hold my breath for), I don't have anything which
would fit as an appropiate psychedelic trip for Cain in this moment in his
life.

In fact, perhaps when I have some psychedelic experince, I might discover that
my whole story is fucked, and that I need to create an entirely different
story and an entirely different context for that particular trip. So while I
like the naturalness and authenticity of taking an actual trip report and
implanting inside of Cain's story, I think it's not feasable, nor neccesarily
even desirable in this case to go that route.

This leaves the second approach, which is to create a symbolic journey which
can pass as a psychedelic experience, and say that this symbolic journey is the
mushroom trip.

This approach has the many advantages for this story over the first approach.
To start, I don't have to have any sort of psychedelic experience to draw from
anyway, so now I don't have to worry about being inauthentic to whatever
experience I do end up having. Given that I don't have an experience that is
the exact opposite of whatever I make up (and how peculiar would that be?) I
should be good on that front.

Also, probably the best advantage of this approach is that it lets me make up
symbolism and things as I see fit. It allows me to place Cain through a
transformative experience, and because the experience is hand-tailored to put
Cain through what I want Cain to go thourgh at that point in his life, it will
only make sense that he comes out with the reaction that he does.

This does introduce the danger of making a mushroom trip which is so contrived
and silly that the reader won't believe it. In order to give this fear it's
due, we must remind ourselves that this is a symbolic representation of a
mushroom trip that Cain is experinecing, and not a revalation. In other words,
just having Jesus visit Cain and tell him that Yahweh isn't real would be the
worst way to handle this scene, even though that is the effect that I am going
for.

So with all of that, I think I am pretty well equipped to handle what goes on
in this scene.

In the last practice session, I took the time to write out a version of the
story which I actually liked quite a lot. I'm not sure to what level I arrived
in writing out this part of the story, but I think it would be prudent now to
write it out in short hand form.

So the beginning of the mushroom trip, after we go through Cain's reasoning for
eating the mushrooms even though they looked like the ones Adam and Eve warned
him about, I want Cain to be not entirely satisfied by his hunger, and then to
continue to wander and look for food.

As he does, I want some bad things to happen to Cain. Nothing crazy. But maybe
a goat comes, and starts chasing him, and then as he is running from that, he
gets poked in the eye by a branch. Maybe he even gets in an altercation with
the wildlife. I don't know if that is too absurd.

I like the idea of him being chased by a goat, because of the symbolism there,
but I don't know.

Regardless, I want him to end up at a cave. As he reaches this cave, he almost
decides to walk in, but decides against it.

The cave itself is not important, I suppose. It is not important exactly what
chases him, and exactly where Cain ends up. What matters is that he starts to
arrive at a state of mind where he thinks he is seeing demons, and he begins to
reason with himself that he is able to see the demons rise up from pandemonium.

When Cain starts to discover this, since we are relaying this story as it
happened twenty years later, I would like to have some interplay between the
third person and the first person perspectives. And by that, I mean, interplay
between the past and the present perspectives. Becasue in both cases, its third
person.

Regardless, in the mushroom trip, Cain starts to get vision of all sorts of
demans and things, so he prays. He prays to Yahweh to deliver him from the evil
that he somehow found himself in.

So at this point, one of two things can happen. The first is, Cain can straight
up see a vision. The second is, Cain can see something like an Eagle, or a
Dove, or some other sort of bird, and take it to be an omen, a sort of answer
to his prayers.

So I want Cain at this point to follow the bird, or the vision, or whatever, to
the top of a mountain.

At the top of the mountain, I want him to hear a voice. The voice of Yahweh. I
want the voice of Yahweh to guide him to find something, either an animal, or a
tree, or something.

When Cain finds it, that something will transform, and it will talk to Cain. It
will reveal to Cain that the voice of Yahweh originates from inside of Cain, as
does the voice he is hearing now from his own voice.

This will be a tricky part to write, because of the difficulty in exactly
portraying the imagary. Because it is a mushroom trip, it is very difficult to
differentiate what is a hallucination, and what is not. Well, it's not
difficult for me, the writer, but the reader must be able to follow my words
with ease if they are to gain anything out of this section. This will prove
most difficult in doing this.

Still, for the purpose of the outline, it doesn't matter if he talks to a
vision of an angel, or if he talks a creature that has transformed, or anything
else. The point is, eventually, he speaks with something who makes him aware of
the fact that Yahweh is simply a voice that exists in his subconscious.

From here, I like the idea of Cain then asked about Satan, and about evil, and
then the vision or creature or whatever will then tell him that he must ask a
harbringer of Satan in order to know that. And then the vision or whatever will
fly away.

At this point, I just got an idea for how the story would go from here.

Cain will return to his camp, weary of everything around him. He is not sure
what to make of receiving a vision from Yahweh with the explicit intent of
telling Cain that he doesn't exist (which again, must be written with utmost
care). When Cain makes it back to his camp, I want him then to take out some of
the dried meat from his bag, and begin to prepare it. As he is preparing it, I
want him to put aside some of the meat to sacrifice to Yahweh, but then, as he
is doing that, I want him to realize that Yahweh isn't really. He then argues,
if Yahweh isn't real, he must test whether or not Satan is real either. In
order to do this, he decides not to sacrifice a portion of his meal, but
instead elects to eat of the entire thing. When nothing evil or sinister
happens to Cain as a result, I want him to say that it opened his eyes to the
possibility of being able to see things as they are, rather than as you expect
them to be.

And that is the basic premise that I want to ring true by the end of this
story. I want Cain to be able to see things for what they are, and not for what
he expects them to be.

Once this portion of the story has been written, I want that to be the main
message that Cain would like to portray to Seth.

At some point here, I want Seth to ask Cain whether or not he should seek the
mushrooms, and I want them to come to some sort of statement, from each of
them, about the course of action. I don't know what that course of action is,
but I want it to be there.

Once that is decided, I also want Seth to ask Cain about coming back. The most
extreme version of this would be for Seth to plead with Cain about returning
home, and the less extreme version which I like better is to have Seth ask Cain
if he would ever consider returning home, even to visit.

There is a line here that I want Cain to say. Something like, "as long as there
are topics that are taboo to speak of between my parents, I will choose to
remain here." I like this a lot, because it shows that, even though Cain has
gone through some pretty gruesome shit, he is making some kind of life for
himself, and he is doing well at it.

From here, then, I want them to part ways. Seth and Cain do not visit for
longer.

Actually, now that I think about it, a version of the story could be that Seth
spent some number of days of his pilgramage at the swamp of Cain. I don't think
this is correct though. I'm not sure.

Actually, that might be the best option. Cain brings Seth around to show him
more of the area. After some time, eventually, Seth and Cain part ways again,
and Seth makes his return journey home.

I want to make it clear that Seth never mentions to his parents that he met
Cain, nor does he ever spell out to his panents at all anything between what
happened in the dialouge between him and Cain.

I also want to make it clear that Seth went on many pilgramages after that, and
never encountered Cain again. Many hundreds of years later, Seth visited the
area where he first met Cain, but Cain had moved on, and was living somewhere
else now.

This is all epilogue shit, but I think it's good to get it ironed out at this
point anyway.

And I think that about covers it as far as the story is concerned. There are
more questions about it, which would have to be answered if I were to write
explicitly on those parts (either before or after the dialouge), but because
the dialogue ends there, and in the interest of only coming up with enough
backstory as is neccesary for the story, I will go ahead and leave everythinng
open when it comes to exactly what happened at other points in the story.

