## 5. Cain's Demons
Seth wasn't sure what to say at this point. He spent a good ammount of time
simply sitting in the hut of his older brother and absorbing the information he
was hearing.

Cain's version of the story of what happened between him and Abel corraborated
with his Father's story. That means that either Cain either really is just
simply the older brother of Seth, or it means that he's a very well-informed
devil. Seth wanted to be sure, so after he came to himself, he gathered the
nerve to break the silence and speak to his older brother.

[In other versions of the story, Seth doesn't give a shit any more about
whether or not Cain is the devil. I stuck with this version in the end because
the concept of Seth being so deluded by his parents that he continues to
insist that Cain is a devil has the sort of comical nonsensicalness that I
think is necessary for these sorts of works. As a result, I think the final
result should have something like what we have below. Just know that I don't
like this version of Seth, just that I think this version best illustrates the
point of "annoying teenager that thinks he understands the world" much as I was
when I was Seth's age.]

"Your story, Cain, has me convinced that you are my brother, and not the devil,
but before I can be totally sure, I must ask you one question."

"Name it," Cain replied casually.

"I want you to tell me about mother."

[I chose this point here because I want to make it very abudently clear, if it
isn't at this point to the reader the most painfully obvious fact in this
entire story, that Cain has something of an Oedipus complex. However, since we
are talking about the world of Cain, it might be the case that at some point
later in my life, I could retell the story of Oedipus, and, at an even later
date in my life, if I feel so inspired, I could probably write some world
building which would put the universe of this story with the universe of that
one, and Cain and Oedipus would compare their situations, and Cain would say
that he has an Oedipus complex, and Oedipus would say that he was simply trying
to avoid the fate of Cain.

In fact, I think detailing the relationship between Jocasta and Oedipus would
be a great exercise in story telling. Of course, that is not the point of what
I am doing right now. What I am doing right now is just simply making the
commentary that Oedipus and Cain both have the property that they had some kind
of sexual insecurity regarding their mother, which is true of every man and
woman that is born on this planet. I want it to be distilled, though, in these
stories, so that the most extreme cases of insecurity regarding the manner of
connection that one has with their mother is brought out to it's forthright and
logical conclusion, and I hope with these stories I am reveal aspects of these
psychological complexs not only in an archetypcal way, but also in a way that
reflects my own psyche, and my own being.]

"Mother?" Cain looked back at his younger brother with a look of slight
confusion. "Why do you want me to describe mother to you?"

"Because," Seth argued, "If the person you describe is anything like the mother
I know, then I will have an easier time believing you are not the devil. So
describe her to me so that you may ease my conscious."

[Here, we need an excuse for Cain to describe his mother in an intimate way.
The purpose of showing Cain's Anima possession is showing that Cain has become
a master at repressing it. I could write versions of the story where Cain is
gushing about his mother, and talking about how much he loves her, but I think
those versions represent a much more childish version of Cain than I want to
portray.]

"Very well," Cain began. "Well, what is there to say? I have not seen her in
over twenty years, but I suppose I can reveal to you the things I do remember
about her.

"When I go back in to my earliest memories, I have this strange feeling of
warmth and redness come to me. It's as if, before I had the capacity to form
words, I still had the capacity to remember sensations, and so I remember the
sensations that I experienced as a child growing up by the breast of our
mother.

"My earliest concrete memories are of working with my mother in the farms. We
would wake up before sunrise, and eat some breakfast with eggs and toast, and
after eating we would go out in the sunrise and tend the fields. In the spring
times, we would plant and rotate crops, and in the fall times we would
harvest.

"Her hair is the most beautiful color, and when you look in to her eyes, it's
as if you can see all the greatest patterns of the world unfold within her
iris. She is loving to her children and her husband, yet stern in her
discipline. At least, that's what I remember.

"But beyond her appearances, she was quite a lovely human being. Always
charming, wise, and educated. She knew how to handle herself in the world, and
I always admired her for that."

Cain paused before continuing, "Of course, towards the end of our
relationship, I started to disagree with her about the nature of the universe,
and that created some strange tension in our bond. But even in that time, she
still put out this aura of love and kindness that I hold inside of myself still
to this day."

Cain paused for a final time. "I think that about covers everything I can say
about my mother that would resonate with you. Again, I must remind you that I
have not seen her in twenty years, so I might not be able to recall my memory
of her to your complete satisfaction. But still, that is what I have to say of
her. Does this satisfy you?"

[Obviously, I could put in here more things that Cain could say about Eve, but
I don't want to go on and on at this point. Perhaps, if I am feeling
particularly down on myself, I will think about my own mother, and then I will
think about all of the depraved things I would say about her if I wanted to go
into a deep and dark point of my own subconsicous in order to produce something
of a quality written word.

But I don't want to do that right now, so we will just leave this open as a
possible pathway to pursue in the future.]

Seth looked in to the eyes of Cain. Cain looked back at Seth. Cain could tell
that Seth was still wary.

[This section might be cut in the final version.

I understand why I decided to write out a logical reason why Seth and Cain
would come to amicable terms with eachother.

I think it is more important that the logic is there than that the logic is
spelled out to the reader. In the final draft, I might keep remnants of this
logic in the final text, but all that matters is that the work is, indeed,
logically consistent, as the two charcetres reason about here.]

"How about this. Let me reason with you, and show you why I am not the devil.
What do you say, will you follow my train of logic?"

Seth looked back at Cain. Minutes ago, he would have said absolutely not, but
since Seth was getting to know Cain, he simply remained silent.

"Very well, let me work this out for you," Cain began. "So the first fact is
that, during your journies, you found me. Unlike the story our mom tells about
the snake in the garden, I did not come seeking out you, you found me."

Seth nodded his head.

"Second fact," Cain continued, "I am indifferent to whether or not you think I
am the devil. If I were, in fact, a devil, I would very much want you to
believe that I was not the devil. But as far as I care, you can believe that I
am prince Lucifer, and walk out of this room right now, and I wouldn't care one
way or the other."

Seth nodded his head again.

"Third fact, I have nothing that I want to persuade you of. I would like to
continue to share stories, because you and I both being human beings, and there
is no greater joy than sharing stories with another human being, but if you
were to freak out on me and become a threat to me in some way, I would just as
soon have you leave. You can call me a liar and a blashphemer, a devil
worshiper, or any other host of vile names, and I would simply ask you to
remove yourself from my presence. Call me whatever you want. The devil would
care that it is being called the devil, but I do not."

Seth weighed all of the things that Cain was saying in his head. Eventually,
after all of the whirlwind of thoughts went through Seth's mind, he asked Cain,
"So let's suppose you are simply my older brother Cain, no demonic possession
involved. What did you do after you went in to exile?"

[So now we get at the point which is what I consider to be the heart of this
section. If there were a section that I would want to practice on for this
piece, it would be this one. This is the part where I really want to
characterize Cain in a great way.

Something also important to note here is that Cain's pilgramage will be modeled
after my own pilgramage to Seattle. I think this is fitting for a few reasons.

First, even though I did not intend to learn anything on that journey, I did in
fact learn quite a great deal, but I have only come to process and understand
what I learned many years later. It has been over five years since I lived in
my Mustang in Seattle, and even still there are things about that journey that
I am only now coming to terms with. I think this parallels what I want Cain's
journey in the wilderness to be. Of course, Cain's is a more extreme version of
mine, where attempting to make a life for yourself in exile is one thing,
running away from your parents in a car is something on a much lesser scale,
but I think this highlights the fact that myth will always have greater
consequences than reality.

Second, I want this story to have ties to something real, and to attatch it to
a real event that happened to me in the irl real life I think is a good way to
make sure that my story stays grounded in reality, and doesn't fly off into
mystical wonder land, where Seth has a lightsaber and Cain uses the force to
project demons to his parents.

Lastly, it follows the mantra 'Write what you know' and I certainly know that
there is a lot of psychological digging to be done with my trip to Seattle and
it's aftermath. 

Because of all of these things, writing out the pilgramage of Cain in many
different ways allows me to come to understand the direction that I want to
take the actual Cain of the finished product of the story. It will require a
lot of typing to get to the point where I have enough raw material to be
satisfied with how the pilgramage of Cain goes, but it will be well worth the
effort in the end.]

Cain paused, and smiled. Cain looked towards Seth, and saw a change in his
eyes, he went from looking through Cain to looking at Cain, and Cain noticed.
Cain noticed that Seth was now looking at him as if he were a person, and no
longer as if he were the devil.

"At first it was rough," Cain answered. "But in time, you come to live with it.
The first three to five years were tough. I had to live off the berries
of the land and off the beasts of the forest, it took me time to find a good
place to settle. There were moments where I thought to myself, 'If only I
hadn't have killed him, I wouldn't be in this predicament at all.' But you
quickly learn that such thoughts don't aid in survival, and you keep making a
life for yourself one step at a time."

There was a pause in the room.

"I would spend hours in a day searching for bushes with adequete berries to
eat, and when I would find them I would only find a handful before I had to
resume searching.

"There were days I became severly depressed. Looking back on it, it's only
natural that such at thing would happen. I had killed my brother and been
exiled from my family. Not only were those things severe in and of themselves,
but also, I was simply alone now. As much as I disagree with my parents, I
think they got one thing right. If there are other human beings on this good
green planet earth, I have not found them.

"So of course I was depressed. I was alone in the world, and committed the
same, and I would argue worse, orginal sin as both my parents talk about, and
without some female to reproduce with, I had very little purpose or drive to
continue my seemingly endless struggle to survive.

"But I carried on, as you can see. I am here. After some years, I decided to
move on from my struggles, and to make a habitat for myself where I can live
comfortably. It's not much, but it allows me a place to store my tools and
equipment, and it also gives me a place to shelter myself in my sleep. The
facts of my regretable past no longer weighed me down. Instead, I was able to
see myself in the present, and in the present I knew I could build myself a
hut, and so I did."

Seth looked back at Cain.

"There is not much more to say beyond that." Cain concluded.

There was another pause in the room before Seth asked another question.

"So tell me what you learned on your pilgramage. What did you learn that made
you doubt the stories that mother and father have told you.

[At this moment, I took a break from commentating, and I am preparing myself to
begin the pilgramage of Cain. Of course, I can choose whatever direction I want
to write it, so I will probably begin with something of a meta version, that
hopefully doesn't go over what I went over in my commentary too much.

In the mean time, I am going to prepare a nice hit and something to drink, and
I am going to stretch for a bit, and maybe go for a short run.

I will leave the text editor open, here, so that I may resume my writing when I
get back.]

Okay, I'm back, and I think I'm ready to do a meta-analysis on what is going on
with this section of my Cain and Seth story.

So this portion of the story (if not the entire section, then at least this
portion of the section) will be called "the Pilgramage of Cain" and will detail
out the events of Cain's pilgramage.

So far, I think this pilrgamage could have anything from a passing mention (if
this were a short story, it would have a passing mention, but this is becoming
more than a short story) to a full on three part act itself.

I could conceive of the beginnings of Cain's exile, pulling thoughts from my
own realizations about Ciara (but framing them in Cain's light, of course) and
demonstrate his ablity to maintain himself in that extremely depressive
environment.

I would then talk about how Cain grew in the wild for some time. This would be
akin to me living in my car in Seattle for the period that I did. This portion
of the story could be as detailed or as sparse as I desire it to be. I imagine
that having one very detailed thing about this portion of the story, along with
a summary of what took place in this time would suffice to demonstrate what
goes on here.

The final portion would then be anagolous to my introduction in to Alliant
systems. I would like Cain to have found himself a piece of land that he is
satisfied with, and I would like for him to continue to cultivate it and make
it what he will. I won't mention at this portion of the story, but it's worth
mentioning in this meta-analysis that in the end, others discovered Cain at his
farms, and he dies here after becoming the father to some children. While a
follow up to that story would be appropiate, it would also be the most
expidient of paths to take, and in this work, the only mention of this should
be in the epilogue, if anywhere.

I think, for the purposes of practice, that it would be benificial if I
practiced on portions of all three of these sections. All of them need to be
fleshed out if this story is ever to take a life of it's own, and so I will
work to do so.

As far as the meta-analysis is concerned from here, the degree to which I
elaborate on the pilgramage of Cain will be in some sort of proportion to the
degree to which I elaborate on Seth persisting that his brother Cain is a
devil. Of course, the most longwinded version of the story has both of these
things occuring, but it might make more sense in the final draft of the story
as a whole to cut one of these things or the other, or to cut parts of these
things. It will depend on what I write, and what resonates with me most
strongly.

So I think that about covers it as far as meta-analysis is concerned. I have
source material and experineces on which to draw inspiration, and I have the
overall outline of what the most long-winded version of this portion of the
story would look like. So now I think the requirement is just to write out as
many versions of the long-winded version of the story that I can, and then take
out of that what I want.

So now I must choose a version of the story to begin with. Let us see.

6:44

Seth: So tell me, Cain, what was your journey like after you became exiled by
our parents?

Cain winced a little bit and thought back to his time there. Cain closed his
eyes for a moment, and really meditated deeply on what it was truly like after
the great catastrophe of his life. It had been twenty years, and he had
forgetten how much he truly remembered, and how much his mind had cofabulated
in that time. Still, though, he had a great deal of memories that he knows were
real, because they represented to Cain what it meant to be a human being in
this fallen world. After Cain had gathered himself, he began his reply

Cain: I don't think it's possible to use words to describe the kinds of things
I was feeling when I was exiled. In the future, our children and our childrens
children might come up with words like depression or anxiety or ptsd to
describe the sorts of things that I was going through, but you have to remember
that I have no way to label these things, and had to question my whole reason
for being alive after I was exiled.

Cain: To think, Seth, that after thirty some years of living, believing that
you will become the successor to the land that your parents have cultivated
with your brother Abel, only to have that all turned up side down within one
fist fight, let me tell you that even words like Depression and PTSD do not
even begin to describe the sorts of psychological phenomenon that I went
through that day.

Cain paused and thought about his past. He thought about what he remembered
just before Abel was killed, and just after the unfortunate accident. He
thought about the immediate whirlwind of feelings that swept through him as
soon as he came to the realization that his brother was dead. When Cain focused
on it, he could not come out with anything that he could use words for. It is
the sort of experience that will only happen once to a man if it does, because
if it happens again it will mean that you have been killed yourself. Most men
may never experience this feeling at all.

Cain: The only way I can describe it is that it was like a whole whirlwind of
whisps, all colors of the rainbow, were circling around me in perfect unison,
and then because I wanted to keep that rainbow for myself, I grabbed a knife,
and I cut off the whisps and grasped them in my hands. But when I do that, the
colors go away, and the whisps die, and all you have left is the dead whisps in
your hand, and the only thing you want is for them to reveal color again, but
you know that they never will again. That is the only way I can describe the
feeling that I felt in that moment.

Cain: It was like the bottom of an infinite sheet of glass shattered underneath
from me, and where I was once standing on what I thought was solid ground I
have come to realize is extremely fragile glass that shatters as soon as I
touch it. I want to grab on to the hole that I fell through, but everywhere you
grab, it's as if the glass shatters in your hands, and cuts you, and the more
you try to get back to standing on top of the glass so you can stop drowning,
the sharper the glass gets, and the more you hurt yourself, and the more you
question the entire reason to exist in the first place.

Cain: You start to reason that maybe standing on top of the glass is no more
interesting than drowning under it, and maybe drowning under the glass will
give you some kind of realease. If not the release from drowning, because you
won't be able to escape that, but if nothing else the escape from the constant
struggle to come back to your feet and find a place where you could come to
stand on top of the glass again when you feel as though there is nothing in
life but the pain of glass cutting in to your hands and eyes and body and
everything.

Cain stopped his psychological thought experiments and emotional projection
there. He could tell that he was disturbing Seth with his imagary, and that
wasn't his intent. He was only trying to give Seth the fullest picture of the
kind of pain and anguish and helplessness that he felt in the immediate hours
and then days after he slew his brother and was then exiled from the land. But
he did not want to scare his younger brother away.

Cain: Of course, those didn't happen to me for real, but psychologically it was
one of the darkest times of my life.

Cain: I lost my desire to eat. I attempted to hunt food, but I found no
motivation to chase wounded animals. It felt like too much work. I was
exhausted and hurt at all times. My feet transformed from the soft feet of a
comfortable farmer to the bruised and scarred feet of a time traveled forest
dweller.

Cain: When I did catch food, I had no desire to eat it, and I had to force food
down my throat. There were times I thought I would throw up by eating a simple
berry, but I resisted the sensations of vomiting and proceeded to shove as much
healthy food into my mouth as my stomach could stand to bear.

Cain: Of course, there were times when my appetite would not cooperate no
matter how much I tried to concentrate, and the inevitable purge of all food
that I had been attempting to eat would arrive and I could do nothing but watch
as my hard earned work attempting to eat something, anything, to sustain the
most basic levels of energy that all humans need to survive was being hurled
violently from my stomach and out my throat on to the ground below. I could do
nothing but be disgusted at the good nutrition that was being wasted on the
ground below me.

Cain: I made the mistake once of attempting to eating the vomit, and while I
was able to pick out most of the chunk of undigested meat that was still good
to eat, the next day I became violently ill. I got the shivers, and could not
stop shaking. I grew astoundingly weak, and it took the most gargantuan of
efforts to do even the simplest of tasks like standing up off of the ground.

Cain: There were times, like that one, where I thought I might die, but in all
instances, what I found, no matter how close to death I came, I was always able
to find a way to navigate myself in a direction where death would not find me.

Cain paused again for a moment to think about where he wanted to take the rest
of the conversation. He thought for a moment about his mindset during this
portion of his exile, and he knew where he wanted to take the conversation.

Cain: I thought about Suicide a few times while I was there. I thought about
the sweet release that death would give me. I thought about the pains and the
sufferings that I was dealing with, not only of the body, but of the mind as
well, and I thought that I might be better off if I could silence all of the
thoughts that were constantly whirling around in my head.

Cain: But I only ever fantisized about suicide, I never made any legitamate
attempt to commit the act. I never even contemplated the method that I would do
it in. My qualms were with my existance, not with my continued existence. I
reasoned that as long as I existed in this moment right now, I would continue
to live with my suffering.

Cain paused

Cain: Well, it seems as though time is still moving along as it always has, and
it still seems that I exist, so as long as I exist I have made the decision
that my direction that I choose to walk will always be dictated by working
towards the best kind of existance that I can conceive of in that moment. It's
what I've been doing so far, and so far it seems to have worked pretty well.

Cain and Seth paused for a moment to examine the hut around them. The
homeliness, the craftsmanship, and the cleanliness that went in to the
construction of the building became the forefront thought on the minds of both
Seth and Cain in that moment.

Cain: Well, obviously, I overcame my depression in this way. The levels of
anxiety that I faced, though extreme, and at times, absolutely paralyzing,
ultimately did not kill me. I am now a stronger man as a result of having
survived the things that I have.

Cain: Do not misunderstand me, I would not wish the feelings that I went
through on anyone. Such psychological deconstruction and existential dread is
so severe that on the twisted or warped would wish such a thing on any human
being. Things like depression and anxiety are awful, and now that I have worked
past them I see that there is a way of living my life which isn't framed around
avoiding those things.

Cain: But such a journey takes time, and, well, I hope at least that there has
been at least some evidence of the time I have taken on that journey.

Cain and Seth stopped at that point in the conversation. Seth was getting very
cozy in the cottage of Cain, and was beginning to sip on his tea. [Meta: I
could include somethnig about the sun here. Maybe the sun is in the evening,
waning under a cloud or something. Something symbolic can be done here with the
sun and the sky.]


