So as I woke up today, I couldn't help but think that I had yet another version
of the Adam and Eve story, and not only was this version comical and
ridiculous, but it also has a rather perfect place in my story. So I am going
to attempt right now to write it out and story board it in to my current Seth
and Cain short story. It might even be it's own section, depending on how much
I want to expand upon it.

Before I just jump right in to it, I do want to try something. Firstly, I want
to make sure that I am typing quickly and efficiently, and that I'm not
stuttering or staggering my words in any way. I want to make sure that my
cadence is at least somewhat even, and that my level of exertion is low.

I have elected to use two, shallow, wrist rests in order to facilittate comfort
for this session.

So I think I have it to the point where I am more or less comfortable with
where my wrists are sitting. As always, it could be different, but I think this
is to the point where I am ready to write.

I also want to parallel this version of this part of the story with the version
of the story where Cain talks about how he went on a mushroom trip after the
exile. These two versions have something similar in common, and that is Cain's
sinister yet playful sarcastic tone.

It also allows me to be graphic with the way I write. I want to incorperate
that as much as I can.

So let's begin.

8:37

Cain chuckled. "Oh, do you really think that's how the story goes? Do you
really think that some magical man with some fairy angels just decided that the
whole thing should just poof into existance with the way of a hand and that he
should make us as his play things? Does that version of why everything is here
make any sense to you?"

Seth looked back at his brother, and then said, "Well, not when you put it
like that, but what would your version be if you're so enlightened?"

"My version! But Seth, I have no idea what any version of the world is at all,
that's the beauty in it! You will learn that in time."

Seth looked back at his brother, not sure whether to be in awe or dumbfounded.
What he was saying sounded like nonsense to Seth's ears, and he felt he had to
retort. "Would you mind answering me straightly and not in riddles?"

Cain laughed. "But Seth, I answer in riddles because I do not know how to
answer some questions in a straight way. To answer your question with the most
due diligence that I can, I will say this.

"I believe that we exist, and the world with us. It's pretty hard to deny your
own existance when you are in the act of denying it. They might come up with
some sort of witty catch phrase to encapsulate this idea, something like 'I
think therefore I am', in the future, and that would be the words I would use
to describe this initial step.

"Next, since we exist, I don't know why we exist, but I would like to find out.
However, pretty quickly, I think everyone comes to realize that the only 'why'
answers that exist are those that we come up with ourselves. In other words,
every 'why' comes from within.

"Also, because we exist, I would like to know some things about the place that
we exist in. When I touch a wall, it feels solid, and when I put my hand in a
pond, it feels wet. What is the most accurate and the most useful way to
describe these phenomenon?

"This may seem trivial, but I have found, Seth, that in simply attempting to
find a framework where you can define something like 'wetness' with fine
grained control, I have been able to touch some of the truths that seem to
permeate all of this existance.

"And yet, at the same time, every time I think I make some profound
breakthrough in how I understand the universe, it helps me for a little bit,
but then I am back at it again asking myself about all of these other things
that I have yet to understand.

"So every time I come upon some kind of useful way of understanding something
that I didn't understand before, I have to remind myself this every time.

"Every time I discover something and think it's the last thing I will ever
discover, because I argue that it must be the most abstract, and the most
fundamental aspect of everything that the universe has to offer, I remember
back to the past when I discovered similar things, only to have more problems
stem out of that understanding than I had questions answered, and there is no
reason to think that this time will be any different.

"This allows me to take each discovery in and of itself, without any
expectation of solving the puzzle of the universe.

"So all of that to say, there are a lot of things in the universe that I don't
understand, and there are also a lot of things in the universe that I didn't
understand that I do now, and I also believe that there are some things that we
don't understand now and we will never understand no matter how sophisticated
we get.

"And while I must say that something like the exact nature of the origins and
reasons for the existance of the universe seems like it belongs in the final
category, I don't know for certain. In any case, it's a very difficult question
to begin to wrap your head around, and I think that any attempt to put together
an answer which is true to the actual reason for this universe existing is
bound to have some inconsistencies in it."

Cain paused for a long moment, and sat with Seth in silence. Seth at points
wanted to interject with his own statements, but decided to use his patience
and maturity and simply listen to Cain's answer. When Cain was finished, they
sat in silence for some time before Seth began to think through what he heard
out loud.

"So, I just want to say," Seth began, "That I have heard and understand
everything that you have said, but I don't know what to make of it yet. I just
want to put out there that I believe our parents story even if you do not, and
so I am not so quick to accept your story, which to you is obviously
self-evident, because to me it also seems to be a reducto ad adsurdum, in that
the statements you make lead to conclusions which I can't rectify with what I
believe about the world."

Seth paused, and Cain smiled. "You don't have to believe me, if that's what
you're trying to say."

Seth continued. "No, it's not that I don't believe you, it's that I don't
believe that what you have said make our parents any more wrong than you are.
By your own words, you could say any model of the world that you come up with
is just as inconsistent with the actual origins of the universe than our
parents. Yet, at the same time, you would make the claim (which to my
understanding is an absolute claim) that our parents are simply 'wrong' in
their claims about the universe, and you seem to harbor some animosity towards
them for it. I think maybe your reasons for viewing the world as you do are
more emotional than you would care to admit."

Cain listened to make sure that Seth was finished, and then made a reply.
"Well, that's the advantage of what I say over what our parents say. There is
no reason to believe me, and the only pre-requisite I require is that you
develop your own damn opinion. That way, when I talk to you, I know I'm talking
to someone with a developed opinion rather than someone who would feel
threatened by a mere question or probe in to a topic. No topic should ever be
taboo, and if I could tell the writers of the future constitution of this world
what the first stipulation that the government should have over their people,
it's that there should be no topic which is ever too sensitive to bring up.

"So, with that being said, I have developed my own damn opinion on some things,
and you are correct, I do feel as though it is entirely self evident that it's
impossible to deny the fact that we exist. I'm not making any claims about our
existance being justified in any way, and I'm not making any claims about our
perception of our own existence being in some sense 'correct', I'm just saying
that it's pretty hard to argue against the fact that you and I both are
experiencing something, and so it's reasonable to say that 'something' exists
rather than nothing. Because if it were just 'nothing' here, there would be no
space with which we could even have this conversation. So I think we can both
agree that there is something rather than nothing."

Cain paused, and Seth nodded his head yes. "That, to me, is the only bold claim
that I am making. It's that we exist. From there, all of the other things that
I do and say in this universe can be taken in to question.

"For instance," Cain continued, "In the future, there may or may not be a man
named Sir Isaac Newton, and this man may or may not discover something like a
set of three laws which he believes when applied in the correct way, will
dictate the motions of all moving bodies, regardless of size, shape, or initial
state. And his theories will prove to describe everything that happens within
certain restrictions of distance and speed. But when masses become large
enough, and relative speed become high enough, people will discover that the
laws that Newton set forth in his papers will break down to something entirely
different. A new theory will emerge which dictates that everything is moving at
the whim of a hypothectical fabric called space time, and that the geometry of
this space time is unlike the regular geometry of three dimensional space which
we can visualize and understand, but instead it's the geometry which only some
of the most sophisticated mathematicians can reason about. And when this man,
whose name I postulate will be something like Albert Einstein, comes up with
this theory, everything about the previous theory will be seen to be something
like a derivative approximation of the more correct Einsteinian view of the
world.

"So now, my whole point in going through this whole ordeal, which may or may
not happen in the future, is to illustate that every way that we have of
interpreting the things that happen to us in the world is simply our own
pre-built understanding of what occurs in the universe injecting itself in to
our every day experiences. But regardless of what level we understand what
happens to us on, it's still undeniable that there is something that is
happening to us, and that's the only thing that I see as totally undeniable in
this world. That's all I'm trying to say."

1:33

Now, Seth, I want to tell you the story of what happened to me when I went in
to exile.

I went back to the place, Seth. I went back to the place where I originally ate
the mushrooms. And Seth, let me tell you, when I went back there, after many
days of wandering, not sure if I was headed in the correct direction to make it
there or not, I found the same clearing in the woods, with the same large tree,
that had similar large mushroom caps on it, but this time, not only was the
tree there, but there also I met a goat. This goat had long, curved horns, and
pupils the color of the deepest blood red.

When I approached the tree, it turned to me and said, "Do not eat, lest I
destroy you."

Of course, I, being startled in to thinking that I had gone delerious from lack
of food or water, turned to see the goat facing me. At first I was startled,
but then when I looked in to it's eyes, I saw that what I was looking at was
somehow unlike anything I had ever seen before. And maybe that was because I
had never seen a goat quite like this one. It was quite a magnificent animal,
rather proud in it's stance, and let me tell you, when I looked in to it's
face, I saw the face of something other than a goat. It wasn't human, but it
looked back at me as though it comprehended and understood me as human.

So when the goat first started talking to me, I turned to it, and I said, "Can
you understand me?"

And the goat's reply was, "Of course I can understand you, that's why I can
talk to you. My name is Beelzabub, fallen archangel along with our Lord Lucifer
and the great Demon himself Lord Satan. Had the circumstances been different, I
might be addressing you from Yahweh himself, but alas, such is the nature of
things that I must address you hailing from our Lord Satan. Such happenings
were inevitable."

Beelzabub turned away, and then returned his goat-gaze back to me. It was
haunting to look upon him. Eventually (and to this day I'm not sure if it was
for myself or for the goat) I became indignant, and I told the goat.

"Okay, Beelzabub, listen to me. I understand you think you're better than me
because you are one of the fallen archangels of our supposed creator Yahweh,
and that you feel as though you can command me as you please. Well, let me tell
you, that is not the case. I am my own, autonomous human being, and you can't
command me as you did my mother. In fact, wasn't that the whole purpose of her
story? The only reason you had control over her is because she obeyed your
words. Well, the only reason you will have control over me is if I do what you
say, and since you are telling me to remove myself from the tree of knowledge,
then I feel it is my duty to eat of the mushrooms again right now."

As I was doing this, my voice getting louder and more fierce as my temper began
to rise, I gathered a handful of mushrooms and I ate them all in one bite.

As soon as I did, the goat turned towards the blood-red sunset, and charged me.
I still had mushrooms in my mouth when it bolted towards me. I did my best to
avoid it's momentum, but it had the upper hand in that it was fast and heavy,
and also in that it was a beast with claws and horns, where I was merely a
mammal with nails and molars.

After I narrowly dodged it's first pass, it turned to me and said, "Now that
you have eaten of the mushrooms of the tree of knowledge, there is no returning
to the state that you knew. Now, as your brother did, you must die."

With that, it took a second pass at me. This time, I couldn't get out of the
way in time, and it managed to tackle me into the tree of knowledge. It pinned
me between it's horns. I could feel the breathe of the goat on my stomach as it
jammed my body into the tree, pressing all of my insides together and beginning
to pierce the skin with it's pressure.

At this moment, I began to fight back against the goat, but nothing seemed to
do any good. My first instinct was to go for the eyes, but by the angle it was
pinning me, I couldn't get my arms in to a position where I could do that.

I then evaluated whether or not there was any way I could get the upper hand on
the goat in any way. While it might have been the case had I been prepared for
such an altercation, then I might have been able to out-smart the goat, but as
it was, you must remember that I was newly exiled, exhausted, hungry, and the
goat had already gotten the upper hand on me. So there was no way I was going
to out maneuver the goat at this point.

After some moments of what amounted to me mostly flailing about, wondering if
this altercation with the goat would be the end of me, in a clearing of the
forest, I saw a great light come down from a canopy in the trees, and begin to
walk it's way towards us.

When the goat realized that the light was working it's way towards us, it
turned around and ran away. I thought to follow it, but at the time I was more
just relieved that I was still alive.

After some moments, the light approached me. When it revealed itself to me, it
said, "I am the angel Gabriel. I have come to deliver a message to you. The
message is this.

"Yahweh, as you believe him to exist, does not exist in that way. Depending on
who you ask, he is either the only thing that is real at all (in which case he
tautaulogically exists through nomenclature gymnastics) or he is the only that
that we can be certain is not real in this world."

Of course, I was greatly confused when Gabriel told this to me, so I asked him,
"Are you real? Is what I am seeing right now in front of me real?"

And Gabriel replied, "You cannot touch me, and I will be gone after you wake.
But this experience will last for your entire life. So it's up to you to
determine if I'm real or not."

At that, I could see Gabriel about to turn and fly off, but before he did I
called out to him and asked, "Wait! If Yahweh isn't real, is Lucifer real? Is
Beelzabub real? Are the fallen angels just as real or not real as you are now?"

I was asking Gabriel, but I already knew the answer. Of course, saying it out
like this makes the answer seem immeditaly obvious, but it was not so much so
at the time to me. So when I finished asking the question, as if he knew my
follow up question and where my train of thought was going, he replied.

"I can bring you to Lucifer, and he can clear this up for you, but we must
hurry."

At this, Gabriel flew off, and I was alone in the forest. I did not know where
to go or what to do. In one second, the Archangel Gabriel was directing me to
the fallen angel Lucifer, and the next he flew away without another word,
leaving me to contemplate my next move alone in the forest.

Fortunately, it wasn't long before I started to wander. I made my way to the
top of the mountain that I saw in the distance to the east. When I made it to
the top, I saw that the mountain was not a mountain, but that it was actually a
volcano, and I had made my way to the crater which led in to the conduit.

The conduit itself was a glowing red color, and out of it, I could see all
sorts of smoke. Not only could I see regular gray smoke, but also purple and
orange smoke was coming out of this conduit. It was quite a magnificent sight
to behold.

I then approached the smoke, and walked in to the crater that led to the
conduit of the volcano. After a few tepid steps, I stopped, got on me knees,
and bore witness to the glorious scene that was unfolding in front of me. The
smoke was nearly too much to bear, as I could feel the wind blowing ash and
dust on to my body and in to my eyes.

After I felt I could no longer bear this any longer, out of the ashes, in one
burst, I saw a magnificent shot of flames spew forth from the volcano. As soon
as it happened, I determined that it would not land in my vicinity, so I gave
myself permission to watch it and follow it all the way down to the ground.
When it landed, I was able to observe the lava that had come out of the
conduit, and even just looking towards it, I could feel the heat emenating from
it's surface.

WHile I was very much fascinated by the things that were happening around me, I
was also very much aware of the dangers of allowing myself to remain in such a
volitale natural environment for so long.

However, as I turned to leave the crater of the volcano and return my way back
down the slope that I had come up on, directly in my path I saw the image of a
man.

This man was very tall, well over eight feet. His feet had long toes with long
nails, perhaps a full 18 inches long each, and his hands were similar, with
nails that resembled knives. He had a long tail which began from his tailbone
and curved up all the way back over his head before curling back down to an
arrowhead point.

On the man's face were many markings, but most prominant were two horns coming
from the crown of his head, as well as the comically large smile that he wore.

The demon's skin looked like it was entirely made out of leather, and there was
absolutely no hair on it to be seen. Similar to the goat that called itself
Beelzabub, this demon had blood red pupils, and his gaze pierced in to the soul
in a way that made me feel dreadfully uneasy.

When I saw this demon (and I thought it was just a man at first, but simple
inspection showed otherwise) I recoiled at first, but then I addressed it, and
I asked, "Are you the Demon that I asked for, sent by Gabriel?"

And at this, the demon chuckled, and replied, "Gabriel? The name doesn't ring
any bells. But perhaps Satan might ring a couple for you?"

I stopped in my tracks for a moment to gather myself. My instinct was to take
up conversation with Satan, because that was the whole point I asked Gabriel to
bring him here in the first place. But I quickly realized I was in danger of
being killed if I stayed here much longer, so I told him.

"Yes, indeed, the name Satan does indeed ring some bells. How about you and I
make our way down the mountain and we can work things out."

At this, the demon smiled, and said, "Oh, no, I think anything we work out will
have to be right here, on top of this very mountain."

"I know you're not real." I replied, in an attempt to reason with the demon.

"Yet you still talk to me. Are you talking to yourself?"

I wasn't sure what to make of this, so I continued, "Why are you here, standing
before me now? What is your purpose? Do you want my soul?"

The demon turned and smiled. "No, I'm afraid your soul would have no use to me.
You are strong, but defiant, you wouldn't make a good companion. But perhaps we
can be allies. There are other ways to coerce a man to my ways besides brute
force."

Of course, I wasn't about to get in to a theological debate with a demon who I
thought I must have been hallucinating on top of a volcano which seemed to be
active and might blow at any moment, so at that point I ignored the demon and
began to make my way down the mountain.

As I crested the crater and began my way down the slope, I turned back and saw
that the demon was still standing there. Not wanting to turn down the
opportunity, and evaluating that maybe the volcano wasn't as dangerous as I
originally estimated, I made my way back to the demon and said, "Talk."

The demon grinned, and said, "Let me tell you a story.

"This is the story of a man named Steve. Steve is a fifth dimensional being.

Now I must pause to say that, when I say Steve is fifth dimensional, I must
clarify that he is a five dimensional being in the space directions. He is
also, coincidentally, a two dimensional being in the time directions. So in
totally, he is a seventh dimensional being.

Now, in Steve's world, this was not uncommon. In fact, it would be quite
strange for any of the beings in Steve's world to be anything other than
seventh dimensional beings. They can reason about it and think through it
hypothetically, what it would be like to be a creature of lesser dimensions,
but they would only do so as a mental exercise, and they wouldn't think much
more of it than that.

However, one day, Steve got an idea. Steve was an architect, and one day he got
an idea for a hypothetical structure which could contain everything within
three spatial dimensions and one time dimension, but it required some fine
tuning and adjusting before Steve could get it just right.

When he did, though, Steve found that he had created something like an entirly
new universe from the one he was used to. Of course, this universe was
constrained to only what it could do in four dimensions, but Steve saw that he
could manipulate some fo the variables in the structure, and produce an
environment where even things that resembled life would spawn.

So Steve continued to play with his fourth dimensional simualator, and he was
even able to put in these creatures which looked a lot like Steve. So, one day,
when he realizes that these creatures are beginning to resemble something like
living things, Steve decides to talk to them. 

He comes down to them, and tells them, "Hey guys, my name is Yahweh (Steve
never liked his seventh dimensional name, so he gave them this one instead), I
made this beautiful garden for both of you to take part it. You can do anything
you want and eat anything you want, and it will be an amazing life.

And right as Steve was saying this, he just remembered that he forgot to
remove one of the quantum flux generators which was powering this world. If the
creatures tampered with it in any way, they could turn out okay, but it could
also be the case that the creatures would tesselate into millions of particles.
Steve wanted to mitagate the risk that they might try to interact with it by
chance, so Steve said, "Also, do not eat of the mushrooms of the center of the
garden. They are forbidden."

With that, Steve then let his simulation commence.

Eventually, after Steve put away his side project and resumed to his regular
duties as a trans-dimensional highway engineer, he started to forget that he
had put together that universe. It was something like a fish tank to him,
something that he maintained, but had lost interest in.

"That's where I come in," The demon resumed. "I entered Steve's universe as a
snake, and I convinced the lady one (and I must say, Steve does have good taste
when it comes to aesthetic design) to eat of the mushroom of the quantum flux
generator. So she did. I did it just because I was upset at Steve, and I wanted
to get back at him. It was petty, I know, but can you hate me for it?"

I looked back at the demon as he finished his story. The volcano behind him I
saw, while not dangerous at that very moment, felt ominous in that I wasn't sure
at which second everything would give and I would be sprayed with boiling lava
from the sky.

Still, as he finished his story, the demon just finished, and looked back on me
with a smug look on his face.

So I asked him. "So is that how it happened? Is that why there are mushrooms in
the pardise that was the Garden of Eden?"

At this, the demon said, "No, of course not. I only exist in your psyche
(although in some ways I exist in everyone) so there is no way I could have
been there when your parents ate the mushrooms however many years ago. My best
guess is that your mom followed a snake to some mushrooms, ate them, heard the
voice of God, told Adam, and then many years later, their mind's confabulated a
story to 
