## X.

FOR HIPPOKLEAS OF THESSALY,

WINNER IN THE TWO-STADION FOOT-RACE OF BOYS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The only reason we know for the digression about Perseus which
occupies great part of this ode seems to be that Thorax, who engaged
Pindar to write it for Hippokleas, and perhaps Hippokleas himself,
belonged to the family of the Aleuadai, who were descended through
Herakles from Perseus.

This ode is the earliest entire poem of Pindar's which survives. He
wrote it when he was twenty years old. The simplicity of the style and
manner of composition are significant of this. But there can scarcely
be said to be traces here of Pindar's early tendency in dealing with
mythological allusions to 'sow not with the hand but with the whole
sack,' which Korinna advised him to correct, and which is conspicuous
in a fragment remaining to us of one of his Hymns.

       *       *       *       *       *

Happy is Lakedaimon, blessed is Thessaly: in both there reigneth a
race sprung from one sire, from Herakles bravest in the fight. What
vaunt is this unseasonable? Nay, now, but Pytho calleth me, and
Pelinnaion[1], and the sons of Aleuas who would fain lead forth the
loud voices of a choir of men in honour of Hippokleas.

For now hath he tasted the joy of games, and to the host of the
dwellers round about hath the valley beneath Parnassos proclaimed him
best among the boys who ran the double race[2].

O Apollo, sweet is the end when men attain thereto, and the beginning
availed more when it is speeded of a god. Surely of thy devising were
his deeds: and this his inborn valour hath trodden in the footsteps
of his father twice victor at Olympia in panoply of war-affronting
arms[3]: moreover the games in the deep meadow beneath Kirrha's cliff
gave victory to the fleet feet of Phrikias[4].

May good luck follow them, so that even in after days the splendour of
their wealth shall bloom. Of the pleasant things of Hellas they
have no scanty portion to their lot; may they happen on no envious
repentings of the gods. A god's heart, it may be, is painless ever;
but happy and a theme of poet's song is that man who for his valiance
of hands or feet the chiefest prizes hath by strength and courage won,
and in his life-time seen his young son by good hap attaining to the
Pythian crown. Never indeed shall he climb the brazen heaven, but
whatsoever splendours we of mortal race may reach, through such he
hath free course even to the utmost harbourage. But neither by taking
ship, neither by any travel on foot, to the Hyperborean folk shalt
thou find the wondrous way.

Yet of old the chieftain Perseus entered into their houses and feasted
among them, when that he had lighted on them as they were sacrificing
ample hecatombs of asses to their god. For ever in their feasts and
hymns hath Apollo especial joy, and laugheth to see the braying ramp
of the strange beasts. Nor is the Muse a stranger to their lives, but
everywhere are stirring to and fro dances of maidens and shrill noise
of pipes: and binding golden bay-leaves in their hair they make them
merry cheer. Nor pestilence nor wasting eld approach that hallowed
race: they toil not neither do they fight, and dwell unharmed of cruel
Nemesis.

In the eagerness of his valiant heart went of old the son of DanaÃ«,
for that Athene led him on his way, unto the company of that blessed
folk. Also he slew the Gorgon and bare home her head with serpent
tresses decked, to the island folk a stony death. I ween there is no
marvel impossible if gods have wrought thereto.

Let go the oar, and quickly drive into the earth an anchor from the
prow, to save us from the rocky reef, for the glory of my song of
praise flitteth like a honey-bee from tale to tale.

I have hope that when the folk of Ephyra pour forth my sweet strains
by Peneus' side, yet more glorious shall I make their Hippokleas for
his crowns and by my songs among his fellows and his elders, and I
will make him possess the minds of the young maidens.

For various longings stir secretly the minds of various men; yet each
if he attain to the thing he striveth for will hold his eager desire
for the time present to him, but what a year shall bring forth, none
shall foreknow by any sign.

My trust is in the kindly courtesy of my host Thorax, of him who to
speed my fortune hath yoked this four-horse car of the Pierides, as
friend for friend, and willing guide for guide.

As gold to him that trieth it by a touch-stone, so is a true soul
known.

His noble brethren also will we praise, for that they exalt and make
great the Thessalians' commonwealth. For in the hands of good men
lieth the good piloting of the cities wherein their fathers ruled.


[Footnote 1: Hippokleas' birth-place.]

[Footnote 2: Down the stadion (220 yards) and back.]

[Footnote 3: I. e. in the race run in full armour, like that at Pytho
which Telesikrates, of Kyrene won, celebrated in the fore-going ode.]

[Footnote 4: Probably a horse with which Hippokleas' father won a race
at Pytho.]



