## V.

FOR PYTHEAS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is uncertain. The winner's brother Phylakidas,
gained the two victories, also in the pankration, which are celebrated
in the fourth and fifth Isthmians.

       *       *       *       *       *

No statuary I, that I should fashion images to rest idly on their
pedestals, nay but by every trading-ship and plying boat forth from
Aigina fare, sweet song of mine, and bear abroad the news, how that
Lampon's son, the strong-limbed Pytheas, hath won at Nemea the
pankratiast's crown, while on his cheeks he showeth not as yet the
vine-bloom's mother, mellowing midsummer.

So to the warrior heroes sprung from Kronos and Zeus and from the
golden nymphs, even to the Aiakidai, hath he done honour, and to the
mother-city, a friendly field to strangers. That she should have issue
of goodly men and should be famous in her ships, this prayed they of
old, standing beside the altar of their grandsire, Zeus Hellenios, and
together stretched forth their hands toward heaven, even the glorious
sons of Endais[1] and the royal strength of Phokos, the goddess-born,
whom on the sea-beach Psamatheia[2] bare. Of their deed portentous and
unjustly dared I am loth to tell, and how they left that famous isle,
and of the fate that drove the valiant heroes from Oinone. I will make
pause: not for every perfect truth is it best that it discover its
face: silence is oft man's wisest thought.

But if the praise of good hap or of strength of hand or of steel-clad
war be my resolve, let one mark me a line for a long leap hence: in
my knees I have a nimble spring: even beyond the sea the eagles wing
their way.

With goodwill too for the Aiakidai in Pelion sang the Muses' choir
most fair, and in the midst Apollo playing with golden quill upon his
seven-toned lyre led them in ever-changing strains. They first of all
from Zeus beginning sang of holy Thetis and of Peleus, and how that
Kretheus' dainty daughter Hippolyte would fain have caught him by her
wile, and persuaded his friend the king of the Magnetes her husband by
counsels of deceit, for she forged a lying tale thereto devised, how
that he essayed to go in unto her in Akastos' bridal bed. But the
truth was wholly contrary thereto, for often and with all her soul she
had besought him with beguiling speech; but her bold words vexed his
spirit; and forthwith he refused the bride, fearing the wrath of the
Father who guardeth host and guest. And he, the cloud-compelling Zeus
in heaven, the immortal's king, was aware thereof, and he promised
him that with all speed he would find him a sea-bride from among the
Nereids of golden distaffs, having persuaded thereto Poseidon, their
kinsman by his marriage, who from Aigai to the famous Dorian Isthmus
cometh oftentimes, where happy troops with the reed-flute's noise
welcome the god, and in bold strength of limb men strive.

The fate that is born with a man is arbiter of all his acts. Thou,
Euthymenes[3], at Aigina falling into the goddess victory's arms didst
win thee hymns of subtle strain: yea and now too to thee, O Pytheas,
who art his kinsman of the same stock and followest in his footsteps,
doth thy mother's brother honour. Nemea is favourable unto him, and
the month[4] of his country that Apollo loveth: the youth that came
to strive with him he overcame, both at home and by Nisos' hill of
pleasant glades[5]. I have joy that the whole state striveth for
glory. Know that through Menander's[6] aid thou hast attained unto
sweet recompense of toils. And meet it is that from Athens a fashioner
of athletes come.

But if thou comest to Themistios[7], to sing of him, away with chill
reserve, shout aloud, hoist to the top-yard of the mast the sail, and
tell how in the boxing and the pankration at Epidauros he won a double
prize of valour, and to the portals of Aiakos bare fresh wreaths of
flowers, led by the Graces of the yellow hair.


[Footnote 1: Wife of Aiakos and mother of Peleus and Telamon. They
killed Phokos.]

[Footnote 2: A sea-nymph, mother of Phokos by Aiakos.]

[Footnote 3: Maternal uncle of Pytheas.]

[Footnote 4: The month called in Aigina Delphinios (April-May) when
the Nemean games took place.]

[Footnote 5: At Megara]

[Footnote 6: Pytheas' trainer, an Athenian.]

[Footnote 7: Maternal grandfather of Pytheas.]



