## VII.

FOR SOGENES OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' PENTATHLON.

       *       *       *       *       *

This victory was probably won B.C. 462. The ode would seem to be full
of allusions, which however we cannot with any certainty explain. It
is partly occupied with the celebration of Achilles' son Neoptolemos,
and Pindar seems anxious to repel the charge of having on some
occasion depreciated that hero.

       *       *       *       *       *

O Eileithuia that sittest beside the deep-counselling Moirai, child of
the mighty Hera, thou who bringest babes to the birth, hearken unto
us! Without thee looked we never on the light or on the darkness of
the night, nor came ever unto her who is thy sister, even Hebe of the
comely limbs.

But we receive our breath not all for a like life; each to his several
lot is kept apart by the yoke of fate.

Now by thy grace hath Sogenes the son of Thearion been foremost
in prowess, and his glory is sung aloud among the winners of the
five-game prize.

For he is a dweller in a city that loveth song, even this city of the
spear-clashing sons of Aiakos, and exceeding fain are they to cherish
a spirit apt for the strife of the games.

If a man have good hap in his attempt, he throweth into the Muses'
stream sweet cause of song: for even deeds of might for lack of song
fall into deep darkness, and in but one way have we knowledge of a
mirror for fair deeds, if by the grace of Mnemosyne of the shining
fillet they attain unto a recompense of toils by the sound of voice
and verse.

Wise shipmates know that the wind which tarrieth shall come on the
third day, nor throw away their goods through greed of more[1]: the
rich and the poor alike fare on their way to death.

Now I have suspicion that the fame of Odysseus is become greater
than his toils, through the sweet lays that Homer sang; for over the
feigning of his winged craft something of majesty abideth, and the
excellence of his skill persuadeth us to his fables unaware.

Blind hearts have the general folk of men; for could they have
discovered the truth, never would stalwart Aias in anger for the arms
have struck through his midriff the sharp sword--even he who after
Achilles was best in battle of all men whom, to win back his bride for
fair-haired Menelaos, the fair breeze of straight-blowing Zephyros
wafted in swift ships toward Ilos' town.

But to all men equally cometh the wave of death, and falleth on the
fameless and the famed: howbeit honour ariseth for them whose fair
story God increaseth to befriend them even when dead, whoso have
journeyed to the mighty centre-stone of wide-bosomed earth.

There now beneath the floor of Pytho lieth Neoptolemos, dying there
when he had sacked the city of Priam where the Danaoi toiled with him.
He sailing thence missed Skyros, and they wandered till they came to
Ephyra, and in Molossia he was king for a little while: howbeit his
race held this state[2] continually. Then was he gone to the god's
home[3], carrying an offering of the chief spoils from Troy: and there
in quarrel concerning meats a man smote him with a knife.

Thereat were the Delphian entertainers of strangers grieved
exceedingly: nevertheless he but paid a debt to destiny: for it was
needful that in that most ancient grove someone of the lords the sons
of Aiakos should abide within thenceforward, beside the goodly walls
of the god's house, and that when with plenteous sacrifice the
processions do honour to the heroes, he should keep watch that fair
right be done. Three words shall be enough: when he presideth over the
games there is no lie found in his testimony thereof.

O thou Aigina, of thy children that are of Zeus I have good courage to
proclaim that as of inheritance they claim the path to glory, through
splendour of their valorous deeds: howbeit in every work a rest is
sweet, yea even of honey cometh surfeit and of the lovely flowers of
Love.

Now each of us is in his nature diverse, and several are the lots
of life we draw, one this and one another: but that one man receive
perfect bliss, this is impossible to men. I cannot find to tell of any
to whom Fate hath given this award abidingly.

To thee, Thearion[4], she giveth fair measure of bliss, first daring
in goodly deeds, and then understanding and sound mind. Thy friend am
I, and I will keep far from the man I love the secret slander, and
bring nigh unto him praise and true glory, as it were streams of
water: for meet is such recompense for the good.

If there be near me now a man of the Achaians who dwelleth far up the
Ionian sea, he shall not upbraid me: I have faith in my proxeny[5]:
and among the folk of my own land I look forth with clear gaze, having
done naught immoderate, and having put away all violence from before
my feet. So let the life that remaineth unto me run cheerly on.

He who knoweth shall say if indeed I come with slanderous speech upon
my lips to strike a jarring note. To thee, Sogenes of the house of the
sons of Euxenos, I swear that without overstepping the bound I have
sent forth the swift speech of my tongue as it were a bronze-headed
javelin, such as saveth from the wrestling the strong neck sweatless
yet, or ever the limbs be plunged in the sun's fire[6].

If toil there were, delight more abundant followeth after. Let be; if
somewhat over far I soared when I cried aloud, yet am I not froward,
that I should deny his glory unto one that conquereth.

The weaving of wreaths is an easy thing: tarry a little: behold the
Muse fasteneth together gold and white ivory, and a lily flower
withal, that she hath plucked from beneath the deep sea's dew[7].

Of Zeus be mindful when thou tellest of Nemea, and guide the
multitudinous voices of our song with a quiet mind: meet is it that
with gentle voice we celebrate in this land the king of gods: for
they tell how he begat Aiakos of a mortal mother, to be for his own
fortunate land a ruler of cities, and for thee, Herakles, a loving
friend and brother.

And if man receiveth aught from man, then may we say that neighbour
is to neighbour a joy worth all else, if he loveth him with steadfast
soul: now if even a god will consent hereto, then in such bond with
thee, O conqueror of the giants[8], is Sogenes fain to dwell happily
in the well-built sacred street of his ancestors, cherishing a mind of
tenderness toward his sire: for as when four horses are yoked together
in a car, so hath he his house in the midst of thy holy places, and
goeth in unto them both on the right hand and on the left[9].

O blessed spirit, thine is it to win hereto the husband of Hera, and
the grey-eyed maid[10]; and thou art able to give to mortals strength
ever and again against baffling perplexities. Make thou to cleave to
them[11] a life of steadfast strength, and wind the bliss thereof amid
both youth and a serene old age, and may their children's children
possess continually the honours that they now have, and greater in the
time to come.

Never shall my heart confess that I have outraged Neoptolemos with
irreclaimable words. But thrice and four times to tell over the same
tale is emptiness in the end thereof, even as he of the proverb that
babbleth among children how that Korinthos was the son of Zeus[12].


[Footnote 1: Retaining the reading [Greek: hupo kerdei balon]. I
conjecture it to mean, 'do not in their eagerness for trade choose an
unfavourable and dangerous time for their voyage, but wait for the
[Greek: kairos], the right opportunity.']

[Footnote 2: The kingdom of Epeiros. Pyrrhos, the invader of Italy,
called himself a descendant of Neoptolemos (who was also called
Pyrrhos).]

[Footnote 3: Delphi.]

[Footnote 4: Father of Sogenes.]

[Footnote 5: Pindar would seem to have been [Greek: proxenos] at
Thebes for some state of Epeiros, to which fact he appeals as a proof
that he stood well with the Epirot descendants of Neoptolemos.]

[Footnote 6: The Pentathlon was composed of five contests, namely,
the jump, throwing the disk, throwing the javelin, the foot-race, and
wrestling. The prize was for the best man in three contests out of the
five. These came in the order in which they are enumerated above; thus
if the best javelin-thrower had already won two of the other matches
he would not be challenged to wrestle, as the prize of the Pentathlon
would be already his. Very probably this had been the case with
Sogenes, so that it would naturally occur to Pindar thus allusively to
expand his not unfrequent comparison of his own art of poetry to that
of a javelin-thrower or archer. On the Pentathlon may be consulted
an article by Professor Percy Gardner in the _Journal of Hellenic
Studies_ for October, 1880; and also Smith's _Dictionary of
Antiquities_ (revised edition).]

[Footnote 7: Coral.]

[Footnote 8: Herakles.]

[Footnote 9: Thearion's house seems to have had a shrine, or at least
some sacred ground, of Herakles at each side of it, so that he might
regard that hero as his neighbour.]

[Footnote 10: Athene.]

[Footnote 11: Thearion and Sogenes.]

[Footnote 12: A proverbial equivalent for vain and wearisome
repetition.]



