## IX.

FOR TELESIKRATES OF KYRENE,

WINNER OF THE FOOT-RACE IN FULL ARMOUR.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hellenic heavy-armed soldier was often called upon to advance at a
run, as for instance in the charge at Marathon. With a view no doubt
to such occasions this race in full armour had been instituted at
Pytho in 498, and in 478 it was won by Telesikrates. The ode was
probably sung in a procession at Thebes, before Telesikrates had gone
back to Kyrene, but the legends related are mainly connected with
Kyrene. Probably the commentators are right in supposing
that Telesikrates was to take home with him a bride from the
mother-country, a fact which makes the legends told specially
appropriate.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have desire to proclaim with aid of the deep-vested Graces a victory
at Pytho of Telesikrates bearing the shield of bronze, and to speak
aloud his name, for his fair fortune and the glory wherewith he hath
crowned Kyrene, city of charioteers.

Kyrene[1] once from Pelion's wind-echoing dells Leto's son, the
flowing-haired, caught up and in a golden car bore away the
huntress-maiden to the place where he made her queen of a land rich in
flocks, yea richest of all lands in the fruits of the field, that her
home might be the third part[2] of the mainland of earth, a stock that
should bear lovely bloom. And silver-foot Aphrodite awaited the Delian
stranger issuing from his car divine, and lightly laid on him her
hand: then over their sweet bridal-bed she cast the loveliness of
maiden shame, and in a common wedlock joined the god and the daughter
of wide-ruling Hypseus, who then was king of the haughty Lapithai,
a hero whose father's father was the Ocean-god--for amid the famous
mountain-dells of Pindos the Naiad Kreüsa bare him after she had
delight in the bed of Peneus, Kreüsa, daughter of Earth.

Now the child he reared was Kyrene of the lovely arms: She was not one
who loved the pacings to and fro before the loom, neither the delights
of feastings with her fellows within the house, but with bronze
javelins and a sword she fought against and slew wild beasts of prey;
yea and much peace and sure she gave thereby to her father's herds,
but for sleep, the sharer of her bed, short spent she it and sweet,
descending on her eyelids as the dawn drew near.

Once as she struggled alone, without spear, with a terrible lion, he
of the wide quiver, far-darting Apollo, found her: and straightway he
called Cheiron from his hall and spake to him aloud: 'Son of Philyra,
come forth from thy holy cave, and behold and wonder at the spirit of
this woman, and her great might, what strife she wageth here with soul
undaunted, a girl with heart too high for toil to quell; for her mind
shaketh not in the storm of fear. What man begat her? From what tribe
was she torn to dwell in the secret places of the shadowing hills? She
hath assayed a struggle unachievable. Is it lawful openly to put forth
my hand to her, or rather on a bridal-bed pluck the sweet flower?'

To him the Centaur bold with a frank smile on his mild brow made
answer straightway of his wisdom: 'Secret are wise Lovecraft's keys
unto love's sanctities, O Phoibos, and among gods and men alike all
deem this shame, to have pleasure of marriage at the first openly. Now
even thee, who mayest have no part in lies, thy soft desire hath led
to dissemble in this thy speech.

The maiden's lineage dost thou, O king, enquire of me--thou who
knowest the certain end of all things, and all ways? How many leaves
the earth sendeth forth in spring, how many grains of sand in sea and
river are rolled by waves and the winds' stress, what shall come to
pass, and whence it shall be, thou discernest perfectly. But if even
against wisdom I must match myself, I will speak on. To wed this
damsel camest thou unto this glen, and thou art destined to bear her
beyond the sea to a chosen garden of Zeus, where thou shalt make her a
city's queen, when thou hast gathered together an island-people to
a hill in the plain's midst. And now shall queenly Libya of broad
meadow-lands well-pleased receive for thee within a golden house thy
glorious bride, and there make gift to her of a portion in the land,
to be an inhabiter thereof with herself, neither shall it be lacking
in tribute of plants bearing fruit after all kinds, neither a stranger
to the beasts of chase. There shall she bring forth a son, whom
glorious Hermes taking up from his mother's arms shall bear to the
fair-throned Hours and to Earth: and they shall set the babe upon
their knees, and nectar and ambrosia they shall distil upon his lips,
and shall make him as an immortal, a Zeus or a holy Apollo, to men
beloved of him a very present help, a tutelar of flocks, and to some
Agreus and Nomios; but to others Aristaios shall be his name.'

By these words he made him ready for the bridal's sweet fulfilment.
And swift the act and short the ways of gods who are eager to an end.
That same day made accomplishment of the matter, and in a golden
chamber of Libya they lay together; where now she haunteth a city
excellent in beauty and glorious in the games.

And now at sacred Pytho hath the son of Karneadas wedded that city
to the fair flower of good luck: for by his victory there he hath
proclaimed Kyrene's name, even her's who shall receive him with glad
welcome home, to the country of fair women bringing precious honour
out of Delphi.

Great merits stir to many words: yet to be brief and skilful on
long themes is a good hearing for bards: for fitness of times is in
everything alike of chief import.

That Iolaos had respect thereto[3] seven-gated Thebes knoweth well,
for when he had stricken down the head of Eurystheus beneath the edge
of the sword, she buried the slayer beneath the earth in the tomb of
Amphitryon the charioteer, where his father's father was laid, a guest
of the Spartoi, who had left his home to dwell among the streets of
the sons of Kadmos who drave white horses. To him and to Zeus at once
did wise Alkmene bear the strength of twin sons prevailing in battle.

Dull is that man who lendeth not his voice to Herakles, nor hath in
remembrance continually the waters of Dirke that nurtured him and
Iphikles. To them will I raise a song of triumph for that I have
received good at their hands, after that I had prayed to them that the
pure light of the voiceful Graces might not forsake me. For at Aigma
and on the hill of Nisos twice ere now I say that I have sung Kyrene's
praise, and by my act have shunned the reproach of helpless dumbness.

Wherefore if any of the citizens be our friend, yea even if he be
against us, let him not seek to hide the thing that hath been well
done in the common cause, and so despise the word of the old god of
the sea[4]. He biddeth one give praise with the whole heart to noble
deeds, yea even to an enemy, so be it that justice be on his side.

Full many times at the yearly feast of Pallas have the maidens seen
thee winner, and silently they prayed each for herself that such an
one as thou, O Telesikrates, might be her beloved husband or her son;
and thus also was it at the games of Olympia and of ample-bosomed
Earth[5], and at all in thine own land.

Me anywise to slake my thirst for song the ancient glory of thy
forefathers summoneth to pay its due and rouse it yet again--to tell
how that for love of a Libyan woman there went up suitors to the city
of Irasa to woo Antaios' lovely-haired daughter of great renown; whom
many chiefs of men, her kinsmen, sought to wed, and many strangers
also; for the beauty of her was marvellous, and they were fain to cull
the fruit whereto her gold-crowned youth had bloomed.

But her father gained for his daughter a marriage more glorious still.
Now he had heard how sometime Danaos at Argos devised for his forty
and eight maiden daughters, ere mid-day was upon them, a wedding
of utmost speed--for he straightway set the whole company at the
race-course end, and bade determine by a foot-race which maiden each
hero should have, of all the suitors that had come.

Even on this wise gave the Libyan a bridegroom to his daughter, and
joined the twain. At the line he set the damsel, having arrayed her
splendidly, to be the goal and prize, and proclaimed in the midst that
he should lead her thence to be his bride who, dashing to the front,
should first touch the robes she wore.

Thereon Alexidamos, when that he had sped through the swift course,
took by her hand the noble maiden, and led her through the troops of
Nomad horsemen. Many the leaves and wreaths they showered on him; yea
and of former days many plumes of victories had he won.



[Footnote 1: A Thessalian maiden, from whom, according to this legend,
the colony of Kyrene in Africa took its name.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. Libya, the continent which we now call Africa.]

[Footnote 3: I. e. by seizing the moment left to him before it should
be too late to act. Thebes and Kyrene were connected by the fact that
members of the Aigid family lived at both places.]

[Footnote 4: Nereus. Powers of divination and wisdom generally are
often attributed to sea-deities.]

[Footnote 5: I. e. at Delphi or Pytho. As being the supposed centre of
the Earth it was the place of the worship of the Earth-goddess.]



