## VI.

FOR STREPSIADES OF THEBES,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is not fixed, but it has been supposed that the
battle referred to--apparently a defeat--in which the winner's uncle
was killed was the battle of Oinophyta, fought B.C. 457. But this, and
the notion that the democratic revolution at Thebes is referred to,
are only conjectures.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wherewithal of the fair deeds done in thy land, O divine Thebe, hath
thy soul had most delight? Whether when thou broughtest forth to the
light Dionysos of the flowing hair, who sitteth beside Demeter to whom
the cymbals clang? or when at midnight in a snow of gold thou didst
receive the mightiest of the gods, what time he stood at Amphitryon's
doors and beguiled his wife, to the begetting of Herakles? Or when
thou hadst honour in the wise counsels of Teiresias, or in Iolaos the
cunning charioteer, or the unwearied spears of the Spartoi? or when
out of the noise of the strong battle-cry thou sentest Adrastos home
to horse-breeding Argos, of his countless company forlorn? or when
thou madest the Dorian colony of the men of Lakedaimon stand upright
upon its feet[1], and the sons of Aigeus thy progeny took Amyklai,
according to the oracles of Pytho?

Nay, but the glory of the old time sleepeth, and mortals are unmindful
thereof, save such as married to the sounding stream of song attaineth
unto the perfect meed that wisdom[2] giveth. New triumph now lead for
Strepsiades with melodious hymn: for at Isthmos hath he borne away the
pankratiast's prize. Wondrous in strength is he, and to look upon of
goodly shape, and his valour is such as shameth not his stature.

So shineth he forth by grace of the Muses iris-haired, and to his
uncle of like name hath he given to share his crown, for albeit
bronze-shielded Ares gave him over unto death, yet remaineth there for
the valiant a recompense of renown. For let whoso amid the cloud of
war from his beloved country wardeth the bloody shower, and maketh
havoc in the enemy's host, know assuredly that for the race of his
fellow-citizens he maketh their renown wax mightily, yea when he is
dead even as while he was yet alive.

So didst thou, son[3] of Diodotos, following the praise of the warrior
Meleagros, and of Hektor, and of Amphiaraos, breathe forth the spirit
of thy fair-flowering youth amid the company of fighters in the front,
where the bravest on slenderest hopes bare up the struggle of war.

Then suffered I a pang unspeakable, but now hath the earth-grasper[4]
granted unto me a calm after the storm: I will set chaplets on my hair
and sing. Now let no jealousy of immortals mar whatever sweet thing
through a day's pursuit I follow, as it leadeth on up to old age, and
unto the term of life appointed.

For all we in like manner die, albeit our lots be diverse. If any lift
up his eye to look upon things afar off, yet is he too weak to attain
unto the bronze-paved dwelling of the gods. Thus did winged Pegasos
throw his lord Bellerophon, when he would fain enter into the heavenly
habitations and mix among the company of Zeus. Unrighteous joyance a
bitter end awaiteth.

But to us, O Loxias of the golden-flowing hair, give also at thy
Pythian games a new fair-flowering crown.


[Footnote 1: The Theban Aigidai helped the mythical 'return of the
Herakleidai.']

[Footnote 2: Wisdom of bards.]

[Footnote 3: Strepsiades the uncle.]

[Footnote 4: Poseidon.]



