## V.

FOR PHYLAKIDAS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode seems to be of earlier date than the last, though placed
after it in our order. The occasion is similar. Probably it was sung
at a banquet at Lampon's house.

       *       *       *       *       *

As one may do amid merry revel of men, so mingle we a second time the
bowls of Muses' melody in honour of Lampon's athlete progeny.

Our first, O Zeus, was unto thee, when at Nemea we[1] won thy
excellent crown, and now is this second unto the lord[2] of Isthmos
and unto the fifty daughters of Nereus, for that Phylakidas the
youngest son is winner in the games. And be it ours to make ready yet
a third for the Saviour[3], the Olympian one, and in honour of Aigina
make libation of our honey-speaking song.

For if a man rejoice to suffer cost and toil, and achieve god-builded
excellence, and therewithal fate plant for him fair renown, already
at the farthest bounds of bliss hath such an one cast anchor, for the
glory that he hath thereby from God. With such desires prayeth the
son[4] of Kleonikos that he may fulfil them ere he meet death or hoary
eld.

Now I call on high-throned Klotho and her sister Fates to draw nigh
unto the praying of the man I love.

And upon you also, golden-charioted seed of Aiakos, I say it is clear
law to me to shed the dew of my good words, what time I set my foot[5]
upon this isle.

For innumerable hundred-foot[6] straight roads are cleft for your
fair deeds to go forth, beyond the springs of Nile, and through the
Hyperboreans' midst: neither is any town so barbarous and strange
of speech that it knoweth not the fame of Peleus, that blissful
son-in-law of gods, or of Aias son of Telamon, and of Aias' sire; whom
unto brazen war an eager ally with Tirynthian men Alkmene's son took
with him in his ships to Troy, to the place of heroes' toil, to take
vengeance for Laomedon's untruth.

There did Herakles take the city of Pergamos, and with help of Telamon
slew the nations of the Meropes, and the herdsman whose stature was as
a mountain, Alkyoneus whom he found at Phlegrai, and spared not of his
hands the terrible twanging bowstring.

But when he went to call the son of Aiakos to the voyage he found the
whole company at the feast. And as he stood there in his lion's skin,
then did Telamon their chief challenge Amphitryon's son of the mighty
spear to make initiative libation of nectar, and handed on unto him
the wine-cup rough with gold.

And Herakles stretched forth to heaven his invincible hands and spake
on this wise: 'If ever, O father Zeus, thou hast heard my prayer with
willing heart, now, even now, with strong entreaty I pray thee that
thou give this man a brave child of Eriboia's womb, that by award of
fate my friend may gain a son of body as staunch[7] as this hide that
hangeth about me, which was of the beast that I slew at Nemea, first
of all my labours; and let his soul be of like sort.'

And when he had thus spoken, the god sent forth the king of birds,
a mighty eagle, and sweet delight thrilled him within, and he spake
aloud as a seer speaketh: 'Behold, the son whom thou askest shall
be born unto thee, O Telamon:' also after the bird's name that had
appeared unto them he said that the child's name should be the mighty
Aias[8], terrible in the strife of warring hosts: so he spake, and
sate him down straightway.

But for me it were long to tell all those valiant deeds. For for
Phylakidas am I come, O Muse, a dispenser of thy triumphal songs, and
for Pytheas, and for Euthymenes[9]; therefore in Argive fashion my
tale shall be of fewest words.

Three victories have they won in the pankration of Isthmos, and others
at leafy Nemea, even these noble sons and their mother's brother: how
fair a portion of song have they brought to light! yea and they water
with the Charites' delicious dew their clan of the Psalychidai, and
have raised up the house of Themistios, and dwell here in a city which
the gods love well.

And Lampon, in that he bestoweth practice on all he doth, holdeth
in high honour the word of Hesiod which speaketh thereof[10], and
exhorteth thereunto his sons, whereby he bringeth unto his city a
general fame: and for his kind entreating of strangers is he loved, to
the just mean aspiring, to the just mean holding fast; and his tongue
departeth not from his thoughts: and among athlete men he is as the
bronze-grinding Naxian whetstone amid stones[11].

Now will I give him to drink of the holy water of Dirke, which
golden-robed Mnemosyne's deep-girdled daughters made once to spring
out of the earth, beside the well-walled gates of Kadmos.


[Footnote 1: I. e. Pytheas. See Nem. v.]

[Footnote 2: Poseidon.]

[Footnote 3: [Greek: Zeus Sotaer], to whom the third cup at a feast
was drunk. He is here invoked also to give a third victory to the
family at the Olympic games.]

[Footnote 4: Lampon.]

[Footnote 5: Figuratively said, as elsewhere.]

[Footnote 6: A hundred feet wide, seemingly.]

[Footnote 7: Not 'invulnerable.' A magic invulnerability was only
attributed to heroes by later legend.]

[Footnote 8: From [Greek: aietos] an eagle.]

[Footnote 9: Maternal uncle of Pytheas and Phylakidas.]

[Footnote 10: [Greek: melete de ergon ophellei]. Opp. 411.]

[Footnote 11: I. e. he stimulates their zeal and skill. The Naxian
whetstone seems to be emery.]



