# JORINDA AND JORINGEL


There was once an old castle in the midst of a large and thick forest,
and in it an old woman, who was a Witch, dwelt all alone.

In the daytime, she changed herself into a cat or a screech-owl, but
in the evening she took her proper shape again as a human being. She
could lure wild beasts and birds to her, then she killed and boiled and
roasted them.

If any one came within one hundred paces of the castle he was obliged
to stand still, and could not stir from the place until she bade him
be free. But whenever an innocent maiden came within this circle, she
changed her into a bird, shut her up in a wicker-work cage, and carried
the cage into a room in the castle. She had about seven thousand cages
of rare birds in the castle.

Now, there was once a maiden who was called Jorinda, who was fairer
than all other girls. She and a handsome youth named Joringel had
promised to marry each other, and their greatest happiness was being
together.

One day, in order that they might be able to talk together in quiet,
they went for a walk in the forest.

“Take care,” said Joringel, “that you do not go too near the castle.”

It was a beautiful evening. The sun shone brightly between the trunks
of the trees into the dark green of the forest, and the turtledoves
sang mournfully upon the young boughs of the birch-trees.

Jorinda wept now and then. She sat down in the sunshine and was
sorrowful. Joringel was sorrowful too. They were as sad as if they were
about to die. Then they looked around them, and were quite at a loss,
for they did not know by which way to go home. The sun was half above
the mountain and half set.

Joringel looked through the bushes, and saw the old walls of the castle
close at hand. He was horror-stricken and filled with deadly fear.

Jorinda was singing:

    “_My little Bird, with the necklace red,
        Sings sorrow, sorrow, sorrow,
      He sings that the Dove must soon be dead,
        Sings sorrow, sor----jug, jug, jug!_”

Joringel looked for Jorinda. She was changed into a Nightingale, and
sang “_jug, jug, jug!_”

A screech-owl with glowing eyes flew three times round about her, and
three times cried, “_to-whoo, to-whoo, to-whoo!_”

Joringel could not move. He stood there like a stone, and could neither
weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot.

The sun had now set. The owl flew into the thicket. Directly afterward
there came out of it a crooked Old Woman, yellow and lean, with large
red eyes and a hooked nose, the point of which reached to her chin. She
muttered to herself, caught the Nightingale, and took it away in her
hand.

Joringel could neither speak nor move from the spot. The Nightingale
was gone.

At last the woman came back, and said in a hollow voice, “Greet thee,
Zachiel. If the moon shines on the cage, Zachiel, let him loose at
once.”

Then Joringel was freed. He fell on his knees before the woman and
begged that she would give him back his Jorinda. But she said that he
should never have her again, and went away. He called, he wept. He
lamented, but all in vain, “Ah, what is to become of me?”

Joringel went away, and at last came to a strange village. There he
kept sheep for a long time. He often walked round and round the castle,
but not too near to it. One night he dreamt that he found a Blood-Red
Flower, in the middle of which was a beautiful large pearl; that he
picked the flower and went with it to the castle, and that everything
he touched with the flower was freed from enchantment. He also dreamt
that by means of it, he recovered his Jorinda.

In the morning, when he awoke, he began to seek over hill and dale to
find such a flower. He sought until the ninth day, and then, early in
the morning, he found the Blood-Red Flower. In the middle of it, there
was a large dew-drop, as big as the finest pearl.

Day and night, he journeyed with this flower to the castle. When he
was within a hundred paces of it he was not held fast, but walked on to
the door.

Joringel was full of joy. He touched the door with the flower, and it
sprang open. He walked in through the courtyard, and listened for the
sound of the birds. At last he heard it. He went on, and found the room
from whence it came. There the Witch was feeding the birds in the seven
thousand cages.

When she saw Joringel, she was angry, very angry, and scolded and spat
poison and gall, but she could not come within two paces of him. He did
not take any notice of her, but went and looked at the cages with the
birds. But there were many hundred Nightingales, how was he to find his
Jorinda again?

Just then he saw the Old Woman quietly take away a cage with a bird in
it, and go toward the door.

Swiftly he sprang toward her, touched the cage with the flower, and
also the Old Woman.

She could now no longer bewitch any one. And Jorinda was standing
there, clasping him round the neck, and she was as beautiful as ever!




[Illustration]

