# THE DONKEY CABBAGES


There was once a young huntsman, who went into the forest to lie in
wait. He had a fresh and joyous heart, and as he was going thither,
whistling upon a leaf, an ugly old crone came up, who spoke to him and
said, “Good-day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry and contented, but
I am suffering from hunger and thirst, do give me an alms.”

The huntsman had compassion on the poor old creature, felt in his
pocket, and gave her what he could afford.

He was then about to go further, but the old woman stopped him and
said, “Listen, dear Huntsman, to what I tell you. I will make you a
present in return for your kindness. Go on your way now, but in a
little while you will come to a tree, whereon nine birds are sitting
which have a cloak in their claws, and are plucking at it. Take your
gun and shoot into the midst of them. They will let the cloak fall down
to you, but one of the birds will be hurt, and will drop dead.

“Carry away the cloak, it is a Wishing-Cloak. When you throw it over
your shoulders, you only have to wish to be in a certain place, and you
will be there in the twinkling of an eye. Take out the heart of the
dead bird, swallow it whole, and every morning early, when you get up,
you will find a gold piece under your pillow.”

The huntsman thanked the Wise Woman, and thought to himself, “Those are
fine things that she has promised me, if all does but come true!”

And verily when he had walked about a hundred paces, he heard in the
branches above him a screaming and twittering. He looked up and saw a
crowd of birds, who were tearing a piece of cloth with their beaks and
claws, and tugging and fighting as if each wanted to have it all to
himself.

“Well,” said the huntsman, “this is wonderful. It has come to pass just
as the old wife foretold!” and he took the gun from his shoulder, aimed
and fired right into the midst of them, so that the feathers flew about.

The birds instantly took to flight with loud outcries, but one dropped
down dead, and the cloak fell at the same time. Then the huntsman did
as the old woman had directed him, cut open the bird, sought the heart,
swallowed it down, and took the cloak home with him.

Next morning, when he awoke, the promise occurred to him. He wished to
see if it also had been fulfilled. When he lifted up the pillow, the
gold piece shone in his eyes. The next day, he found another, and so
it went on, every time he got up. He gathered together a heap of gold,
but at last he thought, “Of what use is all my gold to me if I stay at
home? I will go forth and see the world.”

He then took leave of his parents, buckled on his huntsman’s pouch and
gun, and went out into the world.

It came to pass, that one day he traveled through a dense forest, and
when he came to the end of it, in the plain before him was a fine
castle. An Old Woman was standing with a wonderfully beautiful maiden,
looking out of one of the windows.

The Old Woman, however, was a Witch and said to the maiden, “There
comes a man out of the forest, who has a wonderful treasure in his
body. We must filch it from him, my dear Daughter. It is more suitable
for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart about him, by means of which
every morning, a gold piece lies under his pillow.” She told her what
she was to do to get it, and what part she had to play, and finally
threatened her, and said with angry eyes, “And if you do not attend to
what I say, it will be the worse for you.”

Now when the huntsman came nearer he descried the maiden, and said to
himself, “I have traveled about for such a long time, I will take a
rest for once, and enter that beautiful castle. I have certainly money
enough.” Nevertheless, the real reason was that he had caught sight of
the pretty maiden.

He entered the house, and was well received and courteously
entertained. Before long, he was so much in love with the young Witch
that he no longer thought of anything else, and saw things as she saw
them, and did what she desired.

The Old Woman then said, “Now we must have the bird’s heart, he will
never miss it.” She prepared a drink, and when it was ready, poured
it into a cup and gave it to the maiden, who was to present it to the
huntsman.

She did so, saying, “Now, my Dearest, drink to me.”

So he took the cup, and when he had swallowed the draught, he brought
up the heart of the bird. The girl had to take it away secretly and
swallow it herself, for the Old Woman would have it so. Thenceforward
he found no more gold under his pillow. But it lay instead under that
of the maiden, from whence the Old Woman fetched it away every morning.
But he was so much in love and so befooled, that he thought of nothing
else but of passing his time with the maiden.

Then the old Witch said, “We have the bird’s heart, but we must also
take the Wishing-Cloak away from him.”

The maiden answered, “We will leave him that; he has lost his wealth.”

The Old Woman was angry and said, “Such a mantle is a wonderful thing,
and is seldom to be found in this world. I must and will have it!” She
gave the maiden several blows, and said that if she did not obey, it
should fare ill with her.

So she did the Old Woman’s bidding, placed herself at the window and
looked on the distant country, as if she were very sorrowful.

The huntsman asked, “Why do you stand there so sorrowfully?”

“Ah, my Beloved,” was her answer, “over yonder lies the Garnet
Mountain, where the precious stones grow. I long for them so much that
when I think of them, I feel quite sad, but who can get them? Only the
birds; they fly and can reach them, but a man never.”

“Have you nothing else to complain of?” said the huntsman. “I will soon
remove that burden from your heart.”

With that he drew her under his mantle, wished himself on the Garnet
Mountain. In the twinkling of an eye they were sitting on it together.
Precious stones were glistening on every side, so that it was a joy to
see them. Together they gathered the finest and costliest of them.

Now, the Old Woman had, through her sorceries, contrived that the eyes
of the huntsman should become heavy. He said to the maiden, “We will
sit down and rest a while. I am so tired, that I can no longer stand on
my feet.”

Then they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap, and fell asleep.
When he was asleep, she unfastened the mantle from his shoulders, and
wrapped herself in it, picked up the garnets and stones, and wished
herself back at home with them.

But when the huntsman had had his sleep out, he awoke, and perceived
that his sweetheart had betrayed him, and left him alone on the wild
mountain. Then he said, “Oh, what treachery there is in the world!” and
sat there in care and sorrow, not knowing what to do.

But the mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous Giants, who dwelt
thereon and lived their lives there, and he had not sat long, before he
saw three of them coming toward him. The Giants came up, and the first
kicked him with his foot and said, “What sort of an earthworm is lying
curled up here?”

The second said, “Step upon him and kill him.”

But the third said, “Would that be worth your while? Let him live, he
cannot remain here. When he climbs higher, toward the summit of the
mountain, the clouds will lay hold of him and bear him away.” So saying
they passed by.

But the Huntsman had paid heed to their words, and as soon as they
were gone, he rose and climbed up to the summit of the mountain.
And when he had sat there a while, a cloud floated toward him,
caught him up, carried him away, and traveled about for a long time
in the heavens. Then it sank lower, and let itself down on a great
cabbage-garden, girt round by walls, so that he came softly to the
ground on cabbages and vegetables.

Then the huntsman looked about him, and said, “If I only had something
to eat! I am so hungry, and my hunger will grow greater. But I see here
neither apples nor pears, nor any other sort of fruit, everywhere there
is nothing but cabbages.” At length he thought, “At a pinch I can eat
some of the leaves. They do not taste particularly good, but they will
refresh me.”

With that he picked himself out a fine head of cabbage, and ate it. But
scarcely had he swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, when wonderful! he
felt quite changed.

Four legs grew on him, a large head and two thick ears; and he saw with
horror that he was changed into a Donkey. Still as his hunger became
greater every minute, and as the juicy leaves were suitable to his
present nature, he went on eating with great zest. At last he arrived
at a different kind of cabbage, but as soon as he had swallowed it, he
again felt a change, and resumed his human shape.

Then the huntsman lay down, and slept off his fatigue. When he awoke
next morning, he broke off one head of the bad cabbages and another of
the good ones, and thought to himself, “This shall help me to get my
own again and punish treachery.”

Then he took the cabbages with him, climbed over the wall, and went
forth to seek for the castle of his sweetheart.

After wandering about for a couple of days, he was lucky enough to find
it again. He dyed his face brown, so that his own mother would not have
known him; and begged for shelter. “I am so tired,” said he, “that I
can go no further.”

The Witch asked, “Who are you, Countryman, and what is your business?”

Said he, “I have been so fortunate as to find the most wonderful salad
which grows under the sun, and am carrying it about with me.”

When the Old Woman heard of the exquisite salad, she was greedy, and
said, “Dear Countryman, let me just taste this wonderful salad.”

“Why not?” answered he, “I have brought two heads with me, and will
give you one of them,” and he opened his pouch and handed her the bad
cabbage.

The Witch suspected nothing amiss, and her mouth watered so for this
new dish, that she herself went into the kitchen and prepared it. When
it was ready she could not wait until it was set on the table, but took
a couple of leaves at once, and put them in her mouth. Hardly had she
swallowed them, than she was deprived of her human shape, and she ran
out into the courtyard in the form of a Donkey.

Presently the maid-servant entered the kitchen, saw the salad standing
there ready prepared, and was about to carry it up. But on the way,
according to habit, she was seized by the desire to taste, and she ate
a couple of leaves. Instantly the magic power showed itself, and she
likewise became a Donkey, and ran out to the Old Woman. And the dish
of salad fell to the ground.

Meantime the huntsman sat beside the beautiful maiden, and as no one
came with the salad and she also was longing for it, she said, “I don’t
know what has become of the salad.”

The huntsman thought, “The salad must have already taken effect,” and
said, “I will go to the kitchen and inquire about it.”

As he went down he saw the two Donkeys running about in the courtyard.
The salad, however, was lying on the ground. “All right,” said he, “the
two have taken their portion,” and he picked up the other leaves, laid
them on the dish, and carried them to the maiden. “I bring you the
delicate food myself,” said he, “in order that you may not have to wait
longer.”

Then she ate of it, and was, like the others, immediately deprived of
her human form, and ran out into the courtyard in the shape of a Donkey.

After the huntsman had washed his face, so that the transformed ones
could recognize him, he went down into the courtyard, and said,
“Now you shall receive the wages of your treachery,” and bound them
together, all three with one rope, and drove them along until he came
to a mill.

He knocked at the window, the miller put out his head, and asked what
he wanted. “I have three unmanageable beasts,” answered he, “which I
don’t want to keep any longer. Will you take them in, and give them
food and stable room, and manage them as I tell you? Then I will pay
you what you ask.”

The miller said, “Why not? But how am I to manage them?”

The huntsman then said that he was to give three beatings and one
meal daily to the old Donkey, and that was the Witch; one beating and
three meals to the younger one, which was the servant-girl; and to the
youngest, which was the maiden, no beatings and three meals, for he
could not bring himself to have the maiden beaten. After that he went
back into the castle, and found therein everything he needed.

After a couple of days, the miller came and said he must inform him
that the old Donkey which had received three beatings and only one
meal daily, was dead; “the two others,” he continued, “are certainly
not dead, and are fed three times daily, but they are so sad that they
cannot last much longer.”

The huntsman was moved to pity, put away his anger, and told the miller
to drive them back again to him. And when they came, he gave them some
of the good salad, so that they became human again.

The beautiful maiden fell on her knees before him, and said, “Ah, my
Beloved, forgive me for the evil I have done you. My mother drove
me to it. It was done against my will, for I love you dearly. Your
Wishing-Cloak hangs in a cupboard, and as for the Bird’s-Heart I will
take a potion and bring it up again.”

But he thought otherwise, and said, “Keep it. It is all the same, for I
will take you for my true wife.”

So the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happily together until
their death.




[Illustration]

