# THE IRON STOVE


In the days when wishing was having, a King’s Son was enchanted by an
old Witch, and shut up in an Iron Stove in a forest. There he passed
many years, and no one could deliver him.

Then a King’s Daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself and
could not find her father’s kingdom again. After she had wandered about
for nine days, she at length came to the Iron Stove. Then a voice
issued from it, and asked her, “Whence come you, and whither go you?”

She answered, “I have lost my father’s kingdom, and cannot get home
again.”

Then a voice inside the Iron Stove said, “I will help you to get home,
and that indeed most swiftly, if you will promise to do what I desire
of you. I am the son of a far greater King than your father, and I will
marry you.”

Then was she afraid, and thought, “Alas! What use could I have with
an Iron Stove?” But as she much wished to get home to her father, she
promised to do as he desired.

He said, “You shall return here, and bring a knife with you, and scrape
a hole in the iron.”

Then he gave her a companion who walked near her, but did not speak.
In two hours he took her home. There was great joy in the castle when
the King’s Daughter came back, and the old King fell on her neck, and
kissed her.

She, however, was sorely troubled, and said, “Dear Father, what I
have suffered! I should never have got home again from the great wild
forest, if I had not come to an Iron Stove. But I have been forced to
give my word that I will go back to it, set it free, and marry it.”

Then the old King was so terrified that he all but fainted, for he had
only this one daughter. They, therefore, resolved they would send, in
her place, the miller’s daughter, who was very beautiful. They took her
there, gave her a knife, and said she was to scrape at the Iron Stove.
So she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, but could not bring off
the least morsel of it.

When day dawned, a voice in the stove said, “It seems to me it is day
outside.”

Then she answered, “It seems so to me too. I fancy I hear the noise of
my father’s mill.”

“So you are a miller’s daughter! Then go your way at once. Let the
King’s Daughter come here.”

She went away at once, and told the old King that the man outside there
would have none of her--he wanted the King’s Daughter.

They, however, still had a swineherd’s daughter, who was even prettier
than the miller’s daughter, and they determined to give her a piece
of gold to go to the Iron Stove, instead of the King’s Daughter. So
she was taken thither, and she also had to scrape for four-and-twenty
hours. She, likewise, made nothing of it.

When day broke, a voice inside the stove cried, “It seems to me it is
day outside!”

Then answered she, “So it seems to me. I fancy I hear my father’s horn
blowing.”

“Then you are a swineherd’s daughter! Go away at once. Tell the King’s
Daughter to come, and tell her all must be done as was promised. And
if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall be ruined, and
destroyed, and not one stone be left standing on another.”

When the King’s Daughter heard that, she began to weep. But now there
was nothing for it but to keep her promise. So she took leave of her
father, put a knife in her pocket, and went forth to the Iron Stove in
the forest.

When she got there, she began to scrape, and the iron gave way, and
when two hours were over, she had already scraped a small hole. Then
she peeped in, and saw a youth so handsome, and so brilliant with gold
and with precious jewels, that her very soul was delighted. Therefore,
she went on scraping, and made the hole so large that he was able to
get out.

Then said he, “You are mine, and I am yours. You are my Bride, and have
released me.”

He wanted to take her away with him to his kingdom, but she entreated
him to let her go once again to her father. The King’s Son allowed her
to do so, but she was not to say more to her father than three words,
and then she was to come back again.

So she went home, but she spoke more than three words, and instantly
the Iron Stove disappeared, and was taken far away over glass mountains
and piercing swords. But the King’s Son was set free, and no longer
shut up in it.

After this, she bade good-bye to her father, took some money with her,
but not much, and went back to the great forest, and looked for the
Iron Stove, but it was nowhere to be found. For nine days she sought
it. Then her hunger grew so great that she did not know what to do, for
she could no longer live.

When it was evening, she seated herself in a small tree, and made up
her mind to spend the night there, as she was afraid of wild beasts.
When midnight drew near, she saw in the distance a small light, and
thought, “Ah, there I may be saved!” She got down from the tree, and
went toward the light, and on the way she prayed. Then she came to a
little old house, and much grass had grown all about it, and a small
heap of wood lay in front of it.

She thought, “Ah, whither have I come!” and peeped in through the
window. But she saw nothing inside but Toads, big and little, except a
table covered with wine and roast meat, while the plates and glasses
were of silver. Then she took courage, and knocked at the door. The fat
Toad cried:

    “_Little green Waiting-Maid,
      Waiting-Maid with the limping leg,
      Little Dog of the limping leg,
      Hop hither and thither,
      And quickly see who is without!_”

and a small Toad came along and opened the door to her.

[Illustration: THEN THE KING’S DAUGHTER CAME TO A LITTLE HOUSE]

When she entered, they all bade her welcome, and she was forced to
sit down. They asked, “Where have you come from, and whither are you
going?”

Then she related all that had befallen her, and how because she had
disobeyed the order which had been given her not to say more than three
words, the stove, and the King’s Son also, had disappeared, and now she
was seeking him over hill and dale until she found him. At that, the
old fat one said:

    “_Little green Waiting-Maid,
      Waiting-Maid with the limping leg,
      Little Dog of the limping leg,
      Hop hither and thither,
      And bring me the great box._”

Then the little one went and brought the box. After this they gave her
meat and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which felt like silk
and velvet. She laid herself therein, in God’s name, and slept.

When morning came she arose, and the old Toad gave her three needles
out of the great box, which she was to take with her; they would be
needed by her, for she had to cross a high Glass Mountain, and go
over three piercing swords and a great lake. If she did all this, she
would get her lover back again. Then she gave her three things, which
she was to take the greatest care of, namely, three large needles, a
plough-wheel, and three nuts.

With these she traveled onwards, and when she came to the Glass
Mountain, which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first
behind her feet and then before them, and so got over it. And when
she was over it, she hid them in a place which she marked carefully.
After this she came to the three piercing swords, and then she seated
herself on her plough-wheel, and rolled over them. At last she arrived
in front of a great lake, and when she had crossed it, she came to a
large and beautiful castle.

She went in and asked for a place. She knew, however, that the King’s
Son whom she had released from the Iron Stove in the great forest, was
in the castle. Then she was taken as a scullery-maid at low wages. But,
already the King’s Son had another maiden by his side, whom he wanted
to marry, for he thought that she had long been dead.

In the evening, when she had washed up and was done, she felt in her
pocket and found the three nuts which the old Toad had given her. She
cracked one with her teeth, and was going to eat the kernel, when, lo
and behold, there was a stately royal garment in it! But when the Bride
heard of this she came and asked for the dress, and wanted to buy it,
and said, “It is not a dress for a servant-girl.”

She said, no, she would not sell it, but if the Bride would grant her
one thing she should have it, and that was, leave to sleep one night
in her Bridegroom’s chamber. The Bride gave her permission because the
dress was so pretty, and she had never had one like it.

When it was evening, she said to her Bridegroom, “That silly girl will
sleep in your room.”

“If you are willing so am I,” said he.

She, however, gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a
sleeping-draught. So the Bridegroom and the scullery-maid went to sleep
in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not waken him.

She wept the whole night and cried, “I set you free when you were in an
Iron Stove in the wild forest. I sought you, and walked over a Glass
Mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great lake before I found you,
and yet you will not hear me!”

The servants sat by the chamber-door, and heard how she thus wept the
whole night through, and in the morning they told it to their lord.

And the next evening, when she had washed up, she opened the second
nut, and a far more beautiful dress was within it. When the Bride
beheld it, she wished to buy that also. But the girl would not take
money, and begged that she might once again sleep in the Bridegroom’s
chamber. The Bride, however, gave him a sleeping-drink, and he slept so
soundly that he could hear nothing.

But the scullery-maid wept the whole night long, and cried, “I set you
free when you were in an Iron Stove in the wild forest. I sought you,
and walked over a Glass Mountain, and over three sharp swords and a
great lake before I found you, and yet you will not hear me!”

The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole
night through, and in the morning informed their lord of it.

And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the third
nut, and within it was a still more beautiful dress which was stiff
with pure gold.

When the Bride saw that, she wanted to have it, but the maiden gave it
up only on condition that she might for the third time sleep in the
Bridegroom’s apartment. The King’s Son was, However, on his guard, and
threw the sleeping-draught away.

Now, therefore, when she began to weep and to cry, “Dearest Love, I set
you free when you were in the Iron Stove in the terrible wild forest,”
the King’s Son leapt up and said, “You are the true one, you are mine,
and I am yours.”

Thereupon, while it was still night, he got into a carriage with her,
and they took away the false Bride’s clothes so that she could not get
up. When they came to the great lake, they sailed across it, and when
they reached the three sharp-cutting swords they seated themselves on
the plough-wheel, and when they got to the Glass Mountain they thrust
the three needles in it. And so at length they reached the little old
house. But when they went inside that, it was a great castle, and the
Toads were all disenchanted, and were King’s children, and full of
happiness.

Then the wedding was celebrated, and the King’s Son and the Princess
remained in the castle, which was much larger than the castles of their
fathers. But, as the old King grieved at being left alone, they fetched
him away, and brought him to live with them. And they had two Kingdoms,
and lived together happily ever afterward.

      _A Mouse did run,_
      _The story’s done!_




[Illustration]

