# THE QUEEN BEE


Two King’s Sons once went out in search of adventures, and fell into a
wild, disorderly way of living, so that they never came home again. The
youngest, who was called Simpleton, set out to seek his brothers. When
at length he found them, they mocked him for thinking that he with his
simplicity could get through the world, when they two could not make
their way, and yet were so much cleverer.

They all three traveled away together, and came to an ant-hill. The two
elder wanted to destroy it, to see the little ants creeping about in
their terror, carrying their eggs away, but Simpleton said, “Leave the
creatures in peace. I will not allow you to disturb them.”

Then they went farther, and came to a lake, on which a great number
of ducks were swimming. The two brothers wanted to catch a couple and
roast them, but Simpleton would not permit it, and said, “Leave the
creatures in peace. I will not suffer you to kill them.”

At length they came to a bee’s nest, in which there was so much honey,
that it ran out of the trunk of the tree where it was. The two wanted
to make a fire under the tree, and suffocate the bees in order to take
away the honey, but Simpleton again stopped them and said, “Leave the
creatures in peace. I will not allow you to burn them.”

At last the two brothers arrived at a castle where stone horses were
standing in the stables, and no human being was to be seen. They went
through all the halls until they came to a door in which were three
locks. In the middle of the door there was a little pane, through which
they could see into the room.

There they saw a little Gray Man sitting at a table. They called him,
once, twice, but he did not hear. Then they called him for the third
time, when he got up, opened the locks, and came out. He said nothing
but led them to a handsomely-spread table; and when they had eaten and
drunk, he took each of them to a bedroom.

Next morning, the little Gray Man came to the eldest, beckoned to him,
and conducted him to a stone table, on which were inscribed three
tasks, by the doing of which the castle could be delivered. The first
was that in the forest, beneath the moss, lay the Princess’s pearls,
a thousand in number, which must be picked up. And if by sunset, one
single pearl was wanting, he who had looked for them would be turned to
stone.

The eldest went thither, and sought the whole day, but when it came
to an end, he had found only one hundred, and what was written on the
table came to pass, he was changed into stone.

Next day, the second brother undertook the adventure. It did not,
however, fare much better with him than with the eldest. He did not
find more than two hundred pearls, and was changed to stone.

At last, the turn came to Simpleton, who sought in the moss. But it was
so hard to find the pearls, and he got on so slowly, that he seated
himself on a stone, and wept. And while he was thus sitting, the King
of the Ants, whose life he had once saved, came with five thousand
ants, and before long the little creatures had got all the pearls
together, and laid them in a heap.

The second task was to fetch out of the lake the key of the King’s
Daughter’s bedchamber. When Simpleton came to the lake, the ducks which
he had saved, swam up to him, dived down, and brought the key out of
the water.

But the third task was the most difficult. From amongst the three
sleeping daughters of the King, the youngest and dearest was to be
sought out. They resembled each other exactly, and were only to be
distinguished by their having eaten different sweetmeats before they
fell asleep: the eldest a bit of sugar; the second a little syrup; and
the youngest a spoonful of honey.

Then the Queen of the Bees, which Simpleton had protected from the
fire, came and tasted the lips of all three. At last she remained
sitting on the mouth which had eaten honey; and thus the King’s Son
recognized the right Princess.

Then the enchantment was at an end. Everything was released from sleep,
and those who had been turned to stone received once more their natural
forms. Simpleton married the youngest and sweetest Princess, and after
her father’s death became King, while his two brothers received the two
other sisters.




[Illustration]

