# THE GOOSE-GIRL


There was once upon a time, an old Queen, whose husband had been dead
for many years, and she had a beautiful daughter.

When the Princess grew up, she was betrothed to a Prince who lived very
far away. When the time came for her to be married, and she had to
journey forth into the distant kingdom, the aged Queen packed up for
her many costly vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets, also of gold
and silver, and cups and jewels, in short, everything which appertained
to a royal dowry, for she loved her child with all her heart.

She likewise sent her maid-in-waiting, who was to ride with her, and
hand her over to the Bridegroom. Each had a horse for the journey, but
the horse of the King’s Daughter was called Falada, and could speak.

So when the hour of parting had come, the aged mother went into her
bedroom, took a small knife and cut her finger with it until it bled.
Then she held a white handkerchief to it, into which she let three
drops of blood fall.

She gave the handkerchief to her daughter and said, “Dear Child,
preserve this carefully. It will be of service to you on your way.”

So they took a sorrowful leave of each other. The Princess put the
piece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went away to
her Bridegroom.

After she had ridden for a while she felt a burning thirst, and said
to her waiting-maid, “Dismount, and take my cup which you have brought
with you, and get me some water from the stream, for I should like to
drink.”

“If you are thirsty,” said the waiting-maid, “get off your horse
yourself, and lie down and drink out of the water. I don’t choose to be
your servant.”

So in her great thirst the Princess alighted, bent down over the water
in the stream and drank, and was not allowed to drink out of the golden
cup. Then she said, “Ah, Heaven!” and the three drops of blood answered:

    “_If thy Mother only knew,
      ’Twould surely break her heart in two!_”

But the King’s Daughter was humble, said nothing, and mounted her horse
again.

She rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun scorched
her, and she was thirsty once more. When they came to a stream of
water, she again cried to her waiting-maid, “Dismount, and give me some
water in my golden cup,” for she had long ago forgotten the girl’s ill
words.

But the waiting-maid said still more haughtily, “If you wish to drink,
drink as you can, I don’t choose to be your maid.”

Then in her great thirst the King’s Daughter alighted, bent over the
flowing stream, wept and said, “Ah, Heaven!” and the drops of blood
again replied:

    “_If thy Mother only knew,
      ’Twould surely break her heart in two!_”

And as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, the
handkerchief with the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom, and
floated away with the water without her observing it, so great was her
trouble. The waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and she rejoiced to
think that she had now power over the Bride, for since the Princess had
lost the drops of blood, she had become weak and powerless.

So now, when she wanted to mount her horse again, the one that was
called Falada, the waiting-maid said, “Falada is more suitable for me,
and my nag will do for you,” and the Princess had to be content with
that.

Then the waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade the Princess exchange
her royal apparel for her own shabby clothes; and at length she was
compelled to swear by the clear sky above her, that she would not say
one word of this to any one at the Royal Court. And if she had not
taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot. But Falada saw
all this, and observed it well.

The waiting-maid now mounted Falada, and the true Bride the bad horse,
and thus they traveled onward, until they entered the royal palace.
There were great rejoicings over her arrival, and the Prince sprang
forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid from her horse, and
thought she was his Bride. She was conducted up-stairs, but the real
Princess was left standing below.

Then the old King looked out of the window and saw her standing in
the courtyard, and how dainty and delicate and beautiful she was. He
instantly went to the royal apartment, and asked the Bride about the
girl she had with her, who was standing down below in the courtyard,
and who she was.

“I picked her up on my way for a companion. Give the girl something to
work at, that she may not stand idle.”

But the old King had no work for her, and knew of none, so he said, “I
have a little boy who tends the geese, she may help him.”

The boy was called Conrad, and the true Bride had to help him to tend
the geese.

Soon afterward the false Bride said to the young King, “Dearest
Husband, I beg you to do me a favor.”

He answered, “I will do so most willingly.”

“Then send for the butcher, and have the head of the horse on which I
rode here, cut off, for it vexed me on the way.” In reality, she was
afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to the King’s
Daughter.

Then she succeeded in making the King promise that it should be done,
and the faithful Falada was to die. This came to the ears of the real
Princess, and she secretly promised the butcher a piece of gold if he
would perform a small service for her. There was a great dark-looking
gateway in the town, through which, morning and evening, she had to
pass with the geese: would he be so good as to nail up Falada’s head on
it, so that she might see him again? The butcher promised to do that,
and cut off the head, and nailed it fast beneath the dark gateway.

Early in the morning, when she and Conrad drove out their flock beneath
this gateway, she said in passing:

    “_Alas, Falada, hanging there!_”

Then the head answered:

    “_Alas! young Queen, how ill you fare!
      If this your tender Mother knew,
      Her heart would surely break in two!_”

Then they went still farther out of the town, and drove their geese
into the country. And when they had come to the meadow, she sat down
and unbound her hair which was like pure gold. Conrad saw it and
delighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck out a few hairs. Then
she said:

    “_Blow, blow, thou gentle Wind, I say,
      Blow Conrad’s little hat away,
      And make him chase it here and there,
      Until I’ve braided all my hair,
      And bound it up again._”

And there came such a violent wind that it blew Conrad’s hat far away
across county, and he was forced to run after it.

When he came back she had finished combing her hair and was putting
it up again and he could not get any of it. Then Conrad was angry,
and would not speak to her. And thus they watched the geese until the
evening, and then they went home.

[Illustration: THE HEAD ANSWERED, “ALAS! YOUNG QUEEN HOW ILL YOU FARE”]

Next day when they were driving the geese out through the dark gateway,
the maiden said:

    “_Alas, Falada, hanging there!_”

Falada answered:

    “_Alas! young Queen, how ill you fare!
      If this your tender Mother knew,
      Her heart would surely break in two!_”

And she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her hair.
Conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste:

    “_Blow, blow, thou gentle Wind, I say,
      Blow Conrad’s little hat away,
      And make him chase it here and there,
      Until I’ve braided all my hair,
      And bound it up again._”

Then the wind blew, and blew his little hat off his head and far away,
and Conrad was forced to run after it. When he came back, her hair had
been put up a long time, and he could get none of it. So they looked
after their geese till evening came.

But in the evening, after they had got home, Conrad went to the old
King, and said, “I won’t tend the geese with that girl any longer!”

“Why not?” inquired the old King.

“Oh, because she vexes me the whole day long.”

Then the old King commanded him to relate what it was that she did to
him.

And Conrad said, “In the morning, when we pass beneath the dark gateway
with the flock, there is a sorry horse’s head on the wall, and she says
to it:

   “‘_Alas, Falada, hanging there!_’

And the head replies:

   “‘_Alas! young Queen, how ill you fare!
      If this your tender Mother knew,
      Her heart would surely break in two!_’”

And Conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose-pasture, and
how when there he had to chase his hat.

The old King commanded him to drive his flock out again next day, and
as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the dark gateway, and
heard how the maiden spoke to the head of Falada. Then he went into the
country, and hid himself in the thicket in the meadow. There he soon
saw with his own eyes, the goose-girl and the goose-boy bringing their
flock, and how after a while she sat down and unplaited her hair, which
shone with radiance. And soon she said:

    “_Blow, blow, thou gentle Wind, I say,
      Blow Conrad’s little hat away,
      And make him chase it here and there,
      Until I’ve braided all my hair,
      And bound it up again._”

Then came a blast of wind and carried off Conrad’s hat, so that he had
to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing and plaiting
her hair. All of which the King observed.

Then, quite unseen, he went away, and when the goose-girl came home
in the evening, he called her aside, and asked why she did all these
things.

“I may not tell you that, and I dare not lament my sorrows to any human
being, for I have sworn not to do so by the heaven which is above me.
If I had not done that, I should have lost my life.”

He urged her and left her no peace, but he could draw nothing from her.
Then said he, “If you will not tell me anything, tell your sorrows to
the iron stove there,” and he went away.

Then she crept into the iron stove, and began to weep and lament, and
emptied her whole heart, and said, “Here am I deserted by the whole
world, and yet I am a King’s Daughter, and a false waiting-maid has by
force brought me to such a pass, that I have been compelled to put off
my royal apparel. She has taken my place with my Bridegroom, and I have
to do the mean work of a goose-girl.

    “_If my Mother only knew,
      ’Twould surely break her heart in two!_”

The old King was standing outside by the pipe of the stove, and was
listening to what she said, and heard it. Then he came back again,
and bade her come out of the stove. And royal garments were placed on
her, and it was marvelous how beautiful she was! The old King called
his son, and revealed to him, that he had got the false Bride who was
only a waiting-maid, but that the true one was standing there, as the
goose-girl.

The young King rejoiced with all his heart when he saw her beauty and
youth, and a great feast was made ready to which all the people and all
good friends were invited. At the head of the table sat the Bridegroom
with the King’s Daughter at one side of him, and the waiting-maid on
the other, but the waiting-maid was blinded, and did not recognize the
Princess in her dazzling array.

When they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the old King asked the
waiting-maid as a riddle, what a person deserved who had behaved in
such and such a way to her master, and at the same time related the
whole story, and asked what sentence such a one merited?

Then the false Bride said, “She deserves no better fate than to be put
in a barrel which is studded inside with pointed nails, and two white
horses should be harnessed to it, to drag her along through one street
after another, till she is dead.”

“It is you,” said the old King, “and you have pronounced your own
sentence. Thus shall it be done unto you.”

And when the sentence had been carried out, the young King married his
true Bride, and both of them reigned over their kingdom in peace and
happiness.




[Illustration]

