# THE GOLD-CHILDREN


There was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little
cottage. They earned their bread by fishing, and always lived from hand
to mouth.

But it came to pass one day, when the man was sitting by the waterside
and casting his net, that he drew out a fish entirely of gold.

As he was looking at the fish, full of astonishment, it began to speak
and said, “Hark you, Fisherman, if you will throw me back again into
the water, I will change your little hut into a splendid castle.”

Then the fisherman answered, “Of what use is a castle to me, if I have
nothing to eat?”

The Gold Fish continued, “That shall be taken care of. There will be a
cupboard in the castle in which, when you open it, shall be dishes of
the most delicate meats, and as many of them as you may desire.”

“If that be true,” said the man, “then I can well do you a favor.”

“Yes,” said the Fish, “there is, however, the condition that you shall
tell no one in the world, whosoever he may be, whence your good luck
has come. If you speak but one single word, all will be over.”

Then the man threw the wonderful Fish back again into the water, and
went home.

Where his hovel had formerly stood, now stood a great castle. He opened
wide his eyes, entered, and saw his wife dressed in beautiful clothes,
sitting in a splendid room.

She was quite delighted, and said, “Husband, how has all this come to
pass? It suits me very well.”

“Yes,” said the man, “it suits me too. But I am frightfully hungry,
just give me something to eat.”

Said the wife, “But I have got nothing and don’t know where to find
anything in this new house.”

“There is no need of your knowing,” said the man, “for I see yonder a
great cupboard, just unlock it.”

When she opened it, lo! there stood cakes, meat, fruit, wine.

Then the woman cried joyfully, “What more can you want, my dear?” and
they sat down, and ate and drank together.

When they had had enough, the woman said, “But, Husband, whence come
all these riches?”

“Alas,” answered he, “do not question me about it, for I dare not tell
you anything. If I disclose it to any one, then all our good fortune
will fly.”

“Very good,” said she, “if I am not to know anything, then I do not
want to know anything.”

However, she was not in earnest. She never rested day or night, and she
goaded her husband until in his impatience he revealed that all was
owing to a wonderful Gold Fish which he had caught, and to which in
return he had given its liberty.

And as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with the
cupboard immediately disappeared. They were once more in the old
fisherman’s hut, and the man was obliged to follow his former trade and
fish.

But fortune would so have it, that he once more drew out the Gold Fish.
“Listen,” said the Fish, “if you will throw me back into the water
again, I will once more give you the castle with the cupboard full of
roast and boiled meats. Only be firm; for your life’s sake don’t reveal
from whom you have it, or you will lose it all again!”

“I will take good care,” answered the fisherman, and threw the fish
back into the water.

Now at home, everything was once more in its former magnificence. The
wife was overjoyed at their good fortune. But curiosity left her no
peace, so that after a couple of days she began to ask again how it had
come to pass, and how he had managed to secure it.

The man kept silence for a short time, but at last she made him so
angry that he broke out and betrayed the secret. In an instant the
castle disappeared, and they were back again in their old hut.

“Now you have got what you want,” said he; “and we can gnaw at a bare
bone again.”

“Ah,” said the woman, “I had rather have no riches; if I am not to know
from whom they come, then I have no peace.”

The man went back to fish, and after a while he chanced to draw out the
Gold Fish for a third time.

“Listen,” said the Fish, “I see very well that I am fated to fall into
your hands. Take me home and cut me into six pieces. Give your wife two
of them to eat, two to your horse, and bury two of them in the ground.
Then they will bring you a blessing.”

The fisherman took the Fish home with him, and did as it had bidden him.

It came to pass that from the two pieces that were buried in the
ground, two Golden Lilies sprang up; that the horse had two Golden
Foals; and the fisherman’s wife bore two children who were made
entirely of gold.

The children grew up, became tall and handsome, and the lilies and
horses grew likewise.

Then the lads said, “Father, we want to mount our Golden Steeds and
travel out in the world.”

But he answered sorrowfully, “How shall I bear it, if you go away and I
know not how it fares with you?”

Then they said, “The two Golden Lilies remain here. By them you may see
how it is with us. If they are fresh, then we are in health. If they
are withered, we are ill. If they perish, then we are dead.”

So they rode forth and came to an inn, in which were many people. They
perceived the Gold-Children and began to laugh, and jeer.

When one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not go out
into the world, but turned back and went home again to his father. But
the other rode forward and reached a great forest.

[Illustration: THE MAIDEN SAID, “I WILL BE TRUE TO YOU, YOUR LIFE LONG”]

As he was about to enter it, the people said, “It is not safe for
you to ride through; the wood is full of robbers, who would treat you
badly. You will fare ill. When they see that you are all of gold and
your horse likewise, they will assuredly kill you.”

But he would not allow himself to be frightened, and said, “I must and
will ride through it.”

Then he took bear-skins and covered himself and his horse with them, so
that the gold was not seen, and rode fearlessly into the forest. When
he had ridden onward a little, he heard a rustling in the bushes, and
heard voices speaking together.

From one side came cries of, “There is one!” but from the other, “Let
him go! ’tis an idle fellow, as poor and bare as a church-mouse. What
should we gain from him?”

So the Gold-Child rode joyfully through the forest, and no evil befell
him.

One day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden, who was so
beautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than she
existed in the world.

And as such a mighty love took possession of him, he went up to her and
said, “I love you with my whole heart. Will you be my wife?”

He, too, pleased the maiden so much that she agreed and said, “Yes, I
will be your wife, and be true to you your whole life long.”

They were married. Then just as they were in the greatest happiness,
home came the father of the Bride. When he saw that his daughter’s
wedding was being celebrated, he was astonished, and said, “Where is
the Bridegroom?”

They showed him the Gold-Child, who, however, still wore his bear-skins.

Then the father said wrathfully, “A vagabond shall never have my
daughter!” and was about to kill him.

Then the Bride begged as hard as she could, and said, “He is my
husband, and I love him with all my heart!” until at last he allowed
himself to be appeased.

Nevertheless the idea never left his thoughts, so that next morning he
rose early, wishing to see whether his daughter’s husband was a common
ragged beggar. But when he peeped in, he saw a magnificent golden man
in the bed, and the cast-off bear-skins lying on the ground.

Then he went back, and thought, “What a good thing it was that I
restrained my anger! I should have committed a great crime.”

But the Gold-Child dreamed that he rode out to the chase of a splendid
stag, and when he awoke in the morning, he said to his wife, “I must go
out hunting.”

She was uneasy, and begged him to stay there, and said, “You might
easily meet with a great misfortune.”

But he answered, “I must and will go.”

Thereupon he got up, and rode forth into the forest. It was not long
before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to his dream. He
aimed and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran away. He gave chase
over hedges and ditches for the whole day without feeling tired. In
the evening the stag vanished from his sight, and when the Gold-Child
looked round him, he was standing before a little house, wherein was a
Witch.

He knocked, and a little old woman came out and asked, “What are you
doing so late in the midst of the great forest?”

“Have you not seen a stag?”

“Yes,” answered she, “I know the stag well,” and thereupon a little dog
which had come out of the house with her, barked at the man violently.

“Will you be silent, you odious toad,” said he, “or I will shoot you
dead.”

Then the Witch cried out in a passion, “What! will you slay my little
dog?” and immediately she transformed him, so that he lay like a stone.

Meanwhile his Bride awaited him in vain, and thought, “That which I so
greatly dreaded, which lay so heavily on my heart, has come upon him!”

But at home, the other brother was standing by the Gold-Lilies, when
one of them suddenly drooped. “Alas!” said he, “my brother has met with
some great misfortune! I must away to see if I can possibly rescue him.”

Then he mounted his Golden Horse, and rode forth and entered the great
forest, where his brother lay turned to stone. The old Witch came out
of her house and called him, wishing to entrap him also.

He did not go near her, but said, “I will shoot you, if you do not
bring my brother to life again.”

She touched the stone, though very unwillingly, with her forefinger.
Then he was immediately restored to his human shape.

The two Gold-Children rejoiced, when they saw each other again. They
kissed and caressed each other, and rode away together out of the
forest, the one home to his Bride, the other to his father.

The father then said, “I knew well that you had rescued your brother,
for the Golden Lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again.”

Then they lived happily, and all prospered with them until their death.




[Illustration]

