# THE GOOSE-GIRL AT THE WELL


_The Old Witch_

There was once upon a time, a very old woman, who lived with her flock
of geese in a waste place among the mountains, and there had a little
house. The waste was surrounded by a large forest, and every morning
the Old Woman took her crutch and hobbled into it.

There, however, the dame was quite active, more so than any one would
have thought, considering her age, and collected grass for her geese,
picked all the wild fruit she could reach, and carried everything home
on her back. Any one would have thought that the heavy load would have
weighed her to the ground, but she always brought it safely home.

If any one met her, she greeted him quite courteously. “Good day, dear
Countryman, it is a fine day. Ah! you wonder that I should drag grass
about, but every one must take his burthen on his back.”

Nevertheless, people did not like to meet her if they could help it,
and took by preference a roundabout way. And when a father with his
boys passed her, he whispered to them, “Beware of the Old Woman. She
has claws beneath her gloves. She is a Witch.”

One morning, a handsome young man was going through the forest. The sun
shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze crept through the leaves,
and he was full of joy and gladness. He had as yet met no one, when he
suddenly perceived the old Witch kneeling on the ground cutting grass
with a sickle. She had already thrust a whole load into her cloth, and
near it stood two baskets, which were filled with wild apples and pears.

“But, good little Mother,” said he, “how can you carry all that away?”

“I must carry it, dear Sir,” answered she; “rich folk’s children have
no need to do such things, but with the peasant folk the saying goes,
‘Don’t look behind you, you will only see how crooked your back is!’

“Will you help me?” she said, as he remained standing by her. “You have
still a straight back and young legs, it would be a trifle to you.
Besides, my house is not so very far from here. It stands there on the
heath behind the hill. How soon you would bound up thither!”

The young man took compassion on the Old Woman. “My father is certainly
no peasant,” replied he, “but a rich Count. Nevertheless, that you may
see it is not only peasants who can carry things, I will take your
bundle.”

“If you will try it,” said she, “I shall be very glad. You will
certainly have to walk for an hour, but what will that signify to you?
Only you must carry the apples and pears as well.”

It now seemed to the young man just a little serious, when he heard
of an hour’s walk, but the Old Woman would not let him off, packed the
bundle on his back, and hung the two baskets on his arm. “See, it is
quite light,” said she.

“No, it is not light,” answered the Count, and pulled a rueful
face. “Verily, the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full of
cobblestones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead! I can
scarcely breathe.”

He had a mind to put everything down again, but the Old Woman would
not allow it. “Just look,” said she mockingly, “the young gentleman
will not carry what I, an old woman, have so often dragged along! You
are ready with fine words, but when it comes to being in earnest, you
want to take to your heels. Why are you standing loitering there?” she
continued. “Step out. No one will take the bundle off again.”

As long as he walked on level ground, it was still bearable, but when
they came to the hill and had to climb, and the stones rolled down
under his feet as if they were alive, it was beyond his strength. The
drops of perspiration stood on his forehead, and ran, hot and cold,
down his back.

“Dame,” said he, “I can go no farther. I want to rest a little.”

“Not here,” answered the Old Woman, “when we have arrived at our
journey’s end, you can rest. But now you must go forward. Who knows
what good it may do you?”

“Old woman, you are shameless!” said the Count, and tried to throw off
the bundle, but he labored in vain. It stuck as fast to his back, as if
it grew there. He turned and twisted, but he could not get rid of it.

The Old Woman laughed at this, and sprang about quite delighted on her
crutch. “Don’t get angry, dear Sir,” said she, “you are growing as red
in the face as a turkey-cock! Carry your bundle patiently. I will give
you a good present when we get home.”

What could he do? He was obliged to submit to his fate, and crawl
along patiently behind the Old Woman. She seemed to grow more and more
nimble, and his burden still heavier. All at once, she made a spring,
jumped on to the bundle and seated herself on the top of it. And
however withered she might be, she was yet heavier than the stoutest
country lass.

The youth’s knees trembled, but when he did not go on, the Old Woman
hit him about the legs with a switch and with stinging-nettles.
Groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at length reached
the Old Woman’s house, when he was just about to drop.

When the geese perceived the Old Woman, they flapped their wings,
stretched out their necks, ran to meet her, cackling all the while.
Behind the flock walked, stick in hand, an old wench, strong and big,
but ugly as night. “Good Mother,” said she to the Old Woman, “has
anything happened to you, you have stayed away so long?”

“By no means, my dear Daughter,” answered she, “I have met with nothing
bad, but, on the contrary, with this kind gentleman, who has carried
my burthen for me. Only think, he even took me on his back when I was
tired. The way, too, has not seemed long to us. We have been merry, and
have been cracking jokes with each other all the time.”

At last the Old Woman slid down, took the bundle off the young man’s
back, and the baskets from his arm, looked at him quite kindly, and
said, “Now seat yourself on the bench before the door, and rest. You
have fairly earned your wages, and they shall not be wanting.”

Then she said to the goose-girl, “Go into the house, my little
Daughter, it is not becoming for you to be alone with a young
gentleman. One must not pour oil on to the fire, he might fall in love
with you.”

The Count knew not whether to laugh or to cry. “Such a sweetheart as
that,” thought he, “could not touch my heart, even if she were thirty
years younger.”

In the meantime, the Old Woman stroked and fondled her geese as if they
were children, and then went into the house with her daughter. The
youth lay down on the bench, under a wild apple-tree. The air was warm
and mild. On all sides stretched a green meadow, which was set with
cowslips, wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers. Through the midst
of it rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled, and the white
geese went walking backward and forward, or paddled in the water.

“It is quite delightful here,” said he, “but I am so tired that I
cannot keep my eyes open. I will sleep a little. If only a gust of wind
does not come and blow my legs off my body, for they are as brittle as
tinder.”

When he had slept a little while, the Old Woman came and shook him till
he awoke. “Sit up,” said she, “you cannot stay here. I have certainly
treated you badly, still it has not cost you your life. Of money and
land you have no need, here is something else for you.”

Thereupon she thrust a little book into his hand, which was cut out of
a single emerald. “Take great care of it,” said she, “it will bring you
good fortune.”

The Count sprang up, and as he felt that he was quite fresh, and had
recovered his vigor, he thanked the Old Woman for her present, and set
off without even once looking back at the beautiful daughter. When he
was already some way off, he still heard in the distance the noisy cry
of the geese.

For three days, the Count had to wander in the wilderness before he
could find his way out. He then reached a large town. As no one knew
him, he was led into the royal palace, where the King and Queen were
sitting on their throne. The Count fell on one knee, drew the emerald
book out of his pocket, and laid it at the Queen’s feet. She bade him
rise and hand her the little book.

Hardly, however, had she opened it, and looked therein, than she fell
as if dead to the ground. The Count was seized by the King’s servants,
and was being led to prison, when the Queen opened her eyes, and
ordered them to release him, and every one was to go out, as she wished
to speak with him in private.

When the Queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said, “Of
what use to me are the splendors and honors with which I am surrounded!
Every morning I awake in pain and sorrow. I had three daughters, the
youngest of whom was so beautiful, that the whole world looked on her
as a wonder. She was as white as snow, as rosy as apple-blossoms, and
her hair as radiant as sunbeams. When she cried, not tears fell from
her eyes, but pearls and jewels only.

“When she was fifteen years old, the King summoned all three sisters
to come before his throne. You should have seen how all the people
gazed when the youngest entered. It was just as if the sun were rising!
Then the King spoke, ‘My Daughters, I know not when my last hour may
arrive. I will to-day decide what each shall receive at my death. You
all love me, but the one of you who loves me best, shall fare the best.’

“Each of them said she loved him best. ‘Can you not express to me,’
said the King, ‘how much you do love me, and thus I shall see what you
mean?’

“The eldest spoke. ‘I love my Father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.’
The second, ‘I love my Father as dearly as my prettiest dress.’ But the
youngest was silent.

“Then the father said, ‘And you, my dearest Child, how much do you love
me?’ ‘I do not know, and can compare my love with nothing.’ But her
father insisted that she should name something. So she said at last,
‘The best food does not please me without salt, therefore I love my
Father like salt.’

“When the King heard that, he fell into a passion and said, ‘If you
love me like salt, your love shall also be repaid with salt.’

“Then he divided the kingdom between the two elder, but caused a sack
of salt to be bound on the back of the youngest, and two servants had
to lead her forth into the wild forest.

“We all begged and prayed for her,” said the Queen, “but the King’s
anger was not to be appeased. How she cried when she had to leave us!
The whole road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes.

“The King soon afterward repented of his great severity, and had the
whole forest searched for the poor child, but no one could find her.
When I think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I know not how to
contain myself for sorrow. Many a time I console myself with the hope
that she is still alive, and may have hidden herself in a cave, or has
found shelter with compassionate people.

“But picture to yourself, when I opened your little emerald book, a
pearl lay therein, of exactly the same kind as those which used to fall
from my daughter’s eyes. And then you can also imagine how the sight of
it stirred my heart! You must tell me how you came by that pearl.”

The Count told her that he had received it from the Old Woman in the
forest, who had appeared very strange to him, and must be a Witch.
But he had neither seen nor heard anything of the Queen’s child. The
King and the Queen resolved to seek out the Old Woman. They thought
that there where the pearl had been, they would obtain news of their
daughter.


_The Gray Mask_

The Old Woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning-wheel,
spinning. It was already dusk, and a log which was burning on the
hearth gave a scanty light. All at once, there was a noise outside,
the geese were coming home from the pasture, and uttering their hoarse
cries. Soon afterward the daughter entered. But the Old Woman scarcely
thanked her, and only shook her head a little. The daughter sat down
beside her, took her spinning-wheel, and twisted the threads as nimbly
as a young girl. Thus they both sat for two hours, and exchanged never
a word.

[Illustration: WHEN THE GRAY MASK FELL OFF, HER GOLDEN HAIR BROKE
FORTH]

At last, something rustled at the window, and two fiery eyes peered in.
It was an old night-owl, which cried, “_Uhu!_” three times.

The Old Woman looked up just a little, then she said, “Now, my little
Daughter, it is time for you to go out and do your work.”

She rose and went out, and where did she go? Over the meadows ever
onward into the valley. At last, she came to a well, with three old
oak-trees standing beside it. Meanwhile the moon had risen large and
round over the mountain, and it was so light that one could have found
a needle.

She removed a skin which covered her face, then bent down to the well,
and began to wash herself. When she had finished, she dipped the skin
also in the water, and laid it on the meadow, so that it should bleach
in the moonlight, and dry again.

But how the maiden was changed! Such a change as that was never seen
before! When the gray mask fell off, her golden hair broke forth like
sunbeams, and spread about like a mantle over her whole form. Her eyes
shone out as brightly as the stars in heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a
soft red like apple-blossoms.

But the fair maiden was sad. She sat down and wept bitterly. One tear
after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolled through her
long hair to the ground. There she sat, and would have remained sitting
a long time, if there had not been a rustling and cracking in the
boughs of the neighboring tree. She sprang up like a roe which has been
overtaken by the shot of the hunter.

Just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instant the
maiden had slipped on the old skin and vanished, as does a light blown
out by the wind.

She ran back home, trembling like an aspen-leaf. The Old Woman was
standing on the threshold, and the maiden was about to relate what had
befallen her, but the Old Woman laughed kindly, and said, “I already
know it.”

She led her into the room and lighted a new log. She did not, however,
sit down to her spinning again, but fetched a broom and began to sweep
and scour. “All must be clean and sweet,” she said to the maiden.

“But, Mother,” said the maiden, “why do you begin work at so late an
hour? What do you expect?”

“Do you know then what time it is?” asked the Old Woman.

“Not yet midnight,” answered the maiden, “but already past eleven
o’clock.”

“Do you not remember,” continued the Old Woman, “that it is three years
to-day since you came to me? Your time is up, we can no longer remain
together.”

The maiden was terrified, and said, “Alas! dear Mother, will you cast
me off? Where shall I go? I have no friends, and no home to which I
can go. I have always done as you bade me, and you have always been
satisfied with me. Do not send me away.”

The Old Woman would not tell the maiden what lay before her. “My stay
here is over,” she said to her, “but when I depart, house and parlor
must be clean: therefore do not hinder me in my work. Have no care for
yourself. You shall find a roof to shelter you, and the wages which I
will give you shall also content you.”

“But tell me what is about to happen,” the maiden continued to entreat.

“I tell you again, do not hinder me in my work. Do not say a word
more, go to your chamber, take the skin off your face, and put on the
silken gown which you had on when you came to me, and then wait in your
chamber until I call you.”


_The Goose-Girl_

But I must once more tell of the King and Queen, who had journeyed
forth with the Count in order to seek out the Old Woman in the
wilderness. The Count had strayed away from them in the wood by night,
and had to walk onward alone.

Next day, it seemed to him that he was on the right track. He still
went forward, until darkness came on, then he climbed a tree, intending
to pass the night there, for he feared that he might lose his way. When
the moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived a figure coming
down the mountain. She had no stick in her hand, yet he could see that
it was the goose-girl, whom he had seen before in the house of the Old
Woman.

“Oho,” cried he, “there she comes, and if I once get hold of one of the
Witches, the other shall not escape me!”

But how astonished he was, when she went to the well, took off the
skin and washed herself. Her golden hair fell down all about her,
and she was more beautiful than any one whom he had ever seen in the
whole world. He hardly dared to breathe, but stretched his head as far
forward through the leaves as he dared, and stared at her. Either he
bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, the bough suddenly
cracked, and that very moment the maiden slipped into the skin, sprang
away like a roe, and as the moon was suddenly covered, disappeared from
his eyes.

Hardly had she disappeared, before the Count descended from the tree,
and hastened after her with nimble steps. He had not gone far before he
saw, in the twilight, two figures coming over the meadow. It was the
King and Queen, who had perceived from a distance the light shining in
the Old Woman’s little house, and were going to it.

The Count told them what wonderful thing he had seen by the well, and
they did not doubt but that she was their lost daughter. They walked
onward full of joy, and soon came to the little house. The geese were
sitting all round it, and had thrust their heads under their wings and
were sleeping, and not one of them moved.

The King and Queen looked in at the window. The Old Woman was sitting
there quietly spinning, nodding her head and never looking round. The
room was perfectly clean, as if the little Mist Men, who carry no dust
on their feet, lived there. Their daughter, however, they did not see.
They gazed at all this for a long time. At last they took heart, and
knocked softly at the window.

The Old Woman appeared to have been expecting them. She rose, and
called out quite kindly, “Come in,--I know you already.”

When they had entered the room, the Old Woman said, “You might have
spared yourself the long walk, if you had not three years ago unjustly
driven away your child, who is so good and lovable. No harm has come
to her. For three years she has had to tend the geese. With them
she has learnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart. You,
however, have been sufficiently punished by the misery in which you
have lived.”

Then she went to the chamber and called, “Come out, my little Daughter.”

Thereupon the door opened, and the Princess stepped out in her silken
garments, with her golden hair and her shining eyes, and it was as if
an Angel from Heaven had entered.

She went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks and kissed
them. There was no help for it, they all had to weep for joy. The young
Count stood near them; and when she perceived him, she became as red in
the face as a moss-rose, she herself did not know why.

The King said, “My dear Child, I have given away my kingdom, what shall
I give thee?”

“She needs nothing,” said the Old Woman. “I give her the tears that she
has wept on your account. They are precious pearls, finer than those
that are found in the sea, and worth more than your whole kingdom, and
I give her my little house as payment for her services.”

When the Old Woman had said that, she disappeared from their sight. The
walls rattled a little, and when the King and Queen looked round, the
little house had changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been
spread, and the servants were running hither and thither.




[Illustration]

