# THE THREE LUCK-CHILDREN


A father once called his three sons before him. He gave to the first a
cock, to the second a scythe, and to the third a cat.

“I am old,” said he, “my death is nigh, and I have wished to take
thought for you before my end. Money I have not, and what I now give
you seems of little worth. But all depends on your making a sensible
use of it. Only seek out a country where such things are still unknown,
and your fortune is made.”

After the father’s death, the eldest went away with his cock. But
wherever he came the cock was already known. In the towns, he saw him
from a long distance, sitting upon the steeples and turning round with
the wind; and in the villages he heard more than one crowing. No one
would show any wonder at the creature, so that it did not look as if he
would make his fortune by it.

[Illustration: WHEN THE CORN WAS RIPE, THEY SHOT IT DOWN]

At last, however, it happened that he came to an island where the
people knew nothing about cocks, and did not even understand how to
tell time. They certainly knew when it was morning or evening. But
at night, if they did not sleep through it, not one of them knew how to
find out the time.

“Look!” said he, “what a proud creature! It has a ruby-red crown upon
its head, and wears spurs like a knight. It calls you three times
during the night, at fixed hours; and when it calls for the last time,
the sun soon after rises. But if it crows by broad daylight, then take
notice, for there will certainly be a change of weather.”

The people were well pleased. For a whole night they did not sleep, and
listened with great delight as the cock at two, four, and six o’clock,
loudly and clearly proclaimed the time. They asked if the creature were
for sale, and how much he wanted for it.

“About as much gold as an ass can carry,” answered he.

“A ridiculously small price for such a precious creature!” they cried
all together, and willingly gave him what he had asked.

When he came home with his wealth, his brothers were astonished, and
the second said, “Well, I will go forth and see whether I cannot get
rid of my scythe as profitably.” But it did not look as if he would,
for laborers met him everywhere, and they had scythes upon their
shoulders as well as he.

At last, however, he chanced upon an island where the people knew
nothing of scythes. When the corn was ripe, they took cannon out to
the fields and shot it down. Now this was rather an uncertain affair.
Many shot right over it, others hit the ears instead of the stems and
shot them away, whereby much was lost; and besides all this it made a
terrible noise.

So the man set to work and mowed it down so quietly and quickly that
the people opened their mouths with astonishment. They agreed to give
him what he wanted for the scythe, and he received a horse laden with
as much gold as it could carry.

And now the third brother wanted to take his cat to the right man. He
fared just like the others. So long as he stayed on the mainland, there
was nothing to be done. Every place had cats, and there were so many of
them that most new-born kittens were drowned in the ponds.

At last, he sailed to an island, and it luckily happened that no cats
had ever yet been seen there, and that the mice had got the upper
hand so much, that they danced upon the tables and benches whether
the master were at home or not. The people complained bitterly of the
plague. The King himself, in his palace, did not know how to secure
himself against them. Mice squeaked in every corner, and gnawed
whatever they could lay hold of with their teeth.

But now the cat began her chase, and soon cleared a couple of rooms,
and the people begged the King to buy the wonderful beast for the
country. The King willingly gave what was asked, which was a mule laden
with gold; and the third brother came home with the greatest treasure
of all.

The cat made merry with the mice in the royal palace, and killed so
many that they could not be counted. At last she grew warm with the
work and thirsty, so she stood still, lifted up her head and cried,
“Mew! mew!”

When they heard this strange cry, the King and all his people were
frightened, and in their terror ran out of the palace.

Then the King took counsel what was best to be done. At last, it was
decided to send a herald to the cat, and command her to leave the
palace; if not, she was to expect that force would be used against her.

The councilors said, “We would rather be plagued with mice to which
misfortune we are accustomed, than give up our lives to such a monster
as this.”

A noble youth, therefore, was sent to ask the cat whether she “would
peaceably quit the palace.” But the cat, whose thirst had become still
greater, answered again, “Mew! Mew!”

The youth thought that she said, “Most certainly not! Most certainly
not!” and took this answer to the King.

“Then,” said the councilors, “she must yield to force.”

Cannon were brought out, and the palace was soon in flames. When the
fire reached the room where the cat was sitting, she sprang safely out
of the window. But the besiegers did not leave off, until the whole
palace was shot down to the ground.




[Illustration]

