# THE SINGING, SOARING LARK


There was once on a time, a man who was about to set out on a long
journey. At parting he asked his three daughters what he should bring
back for them.

Whereupon the eldest wished for pearls, the second wished for diamonds,
but the third said, “Dear Father, I should like a Singing, Soaring
Lark.”

The father said, “Yes, if I can get it, you shall have it,” kissed all
three, and set out.

Now, when the time had come for him to return home, he had brought
pearls and diamonds for the two eldest. But he had sought everywhere
in vain for a Singing, Soaring Lark for the youngest, and he was very
unhappy about it, for she was his favorite child.

Then his road lay through a forest, and in the midst of it was a
splendid castle. Near the castle stood a tree, and quite on the top of
the tree, he saw a Singing, Soaring Lark.

“Aha, you come just at the right moment!” he said, quite delighted, and
called to his servant to climb up and catch the little creature.

But as he approached the tree, a Lion leapt from beneath it, shook
himself, and roared till the leaves on the tree trembled. “He who tries
to steal my Singing, Soaring Lark,” he cried, “will I devour.”

Then the man said, “I did not know that the bird belonged to you. I
will make amends for the wrong I have done, and ransom myself with a
large sum of money, only spare my life.”

The Lion said, “Nothing can save you, unless you will promise to give
me for mine own what first meets you on your return home. But if you
will do that, I will grant you your life, and you shall have the bird
for your daughter, into the bargain.”

The man hesitated and said, “That might be my youngest daughter, she
loves me best, and always runs to meet me on my return home.”

The servant, however, was terrified and said, “Why should your daughter
be the very one to meet you, it might as easily be a cat, or dog?”

Then the man allowed himself to be persuaded, took the Singing, Soaring
Lark, and promised to give the Lion whatsoever should first meet him on
his return home.

When he reached home and entered his house, the first who met him was
no other than his youngest and dearest daughter, who came running up,
kissed and embraced him. When she saw that he had brought with him a
Singing, Soaring Lark, she was beside herself with joy.

The father, however, could not rejoice, but began to weep, and said,
“My dearest Child, I have bought the little bird at a great cost! In
return for it, I have been obliged to promise you to a savage Lion.
When he has you he will tear you in pieces and devour you,” and he told
her all, just as it had happened, and begged her not to go thither,
come what might.

But she consoled him and said, “Dearest Father, indeed your promise
must be fulfilled. I will go thither and soften the Lion, so that I may
return to you safely.”

Next morning, she had the road pointed out to her, took leave, and went
fearlessly out into the forest. The Lion, however, was an enchanted
Prince and was by day a Lion, and all his people were Lions with him.
But in the night, they resumed their natural human shapes.

On her arrival, she was kindly received and led into the castle. When
night came, the Lion turned into a handsome man, and their wedding
was celebrated with great magnificence. They lived happily together,
remained awake at night, and slept in the daytime.

One day, he came and said, “To-morrow there is a feast in your father’s
house, because your eldest sister is to be married, and if you are
inclined to go there, my Lions shall conduct you.”

She said, “Yes, I should very much like to see my father again,” and
went thither, accompanied by the Lions.

There was great joy when she arrived, for they had all believed that
she had been torn in pieces by the Lion, and had long ceased to live.
But she told them what a handsome husband she had, and how well off she
was. She remained with them while the wedding-feast lasted, and then
went back again to the forest.

When the second daughter was about to be married, and she was again
invited to the wedding, she said to the Lion, “This time, I will not go
alone. You must come with me.”

The Lion, however, said that it was too dangerous for him, for if a ray
from a burning candle should fall on him, he would be changed into a
Dove, and for seven years long would have to fly about with the Doves.

She said, “Ah, but do come with me, I will take great care of you and
guard you from all light.”

So they went away together, and took with them their little child as
well. She had a chamber built, so strong and thick that no ray could
pierce through it. In this he was to shut himself up when the candles
were lit for the wedding-feast. But the door was made of green wood
which warped and left a little crack which no one noticed.

The wedding was celebrated with magnificence; but when the procession
with all its candles and torches came back from church and passed by
this apartment, a ray about the breadth of a hair fell on the King’s
Son. When this ray touched him, he was transformed in an instant. And
when she came in, and looked for him, she did not see him, but a white
Dove was sitting there.

The Dove said to her, “For seven years must I fly about the world, but
at every seventh step that you take I will let fall a drop of red blood
and a white feather. These will show you the way. If you follow the
trace you can release me.”

Thereupon the Dove flew out at the door, and she followed him. At every
seventh step a red drop of blood and a little white feather fell down,
and showed her the way.

So she went continually farther and farther, in the wide world, never
looking about her nor resting, and the seven years were almost past.
Then she rejoiced and thought that they would soon be delivered, and
yet they were so far from it!

Once when they were thus moving onwards, no little feather and no
drop of red blood fell, and when she raised her eyes the Dove had
disappeared. And as she thought to herself, “In this no man can help
me,” she climbed up to the Sun, and said to him, “You shine into every
crevice, and over every peak, have you not seen a white Dove flying?”

“No,” said the Sun, “I have seen none, but I present you with a casket.
Open it when you are in sorest need.”

Then she thanked the Sun, and went on until evening came and the Moon
appeared. She then asked her, “You shine the whole night through, and
on every field and forest, have you not seen a white Dove flying?”

“No,” said the Moon, “I have seen no Dove, but here I give you an egg.
Break it when you are in great need.”

She thanked the Moon, and went on until the Night Wind came up and blew
on her, then she said to it, “You blow over every tree and under every
leaf, have you not seen a white Dove flying?”

“No,” said the Night Wind, “I have seen none, but I will ask the three
other Winds; perhaps they have seen it.”

The East Wind and the West Wind came, and had seen nothing, but the
South Wind said, “I have seen the white Dove, it has flown to the Red
Sea, there it has become a Lion again, for the seven years are over.
The Lion is there fighting with a Dragon. The Dragon, however, is an
enchanted Princess.”

The Night Wind then said to her, “I will advise you. Go to the Red
Sea, on the right bank are some tall reeds, count them, break off the
eleventh, and strike the Dragon with it. Then the Lion will be able
to subdue it, and both then will regain their human form. After that,
look round and you will see the Griffin which is by the Red Sea. Swing
yourself with your beloved, on to his back, and the bird will carry you
over the sea to your own home.

“Here is a nut for you, when you are above the centre of the sea, let
the nut fall. It will immediately shoot up, and a tall nut-tree will
grow out of the water on which the Griffin may rest; for if he cannot
rest, he will not be strong enough to carry you across. If you forget
to throw down the nut, he will let you fall into the sea.”

Then she went thither, and found everything as the Night Wind had said.
She counted the reeds by the sea, and cut off the eleventh, struck the
Dragon with it, whereupon the Lion overcame it. Immediately both of
them regained their human shapes. But when the Princess, who had been
the Dragon, was delivered from enchantment, she took the youth by the
arm, seated herself on the Griffin, and carried him off with her.

There stood the poor maiden, who had wandered so far and was again
forsaken! She sat down and cried, but at last she took courage and
said, “Still I will go as far as the Wind blows and as long as the cock
crows, until I find him.”

She went forth by long, long roads, until at last she came to the
castle, where both of them were living together. There she heard that a
feast was to be held, in which they would celebrate their wedding, but
she said, “God still helps me,” and opened the casket that the Sun had
given her. A dress lay therein as brilliant as the sun itself.

So she took it out and put it on, and went up into the castle, and
every one, even the Bride, looked at her with astonishment. The
dress pleased the Bride so well that she thought it might do for her
wedding-dress, and asked if it was for sale?

“Not for money or land,” answered she, “but for flesh and blood.”

The Bride asked her what she meant by that, then she said, “Let me
sleep a night in the chamber where the Bridegroom sleeps.”

The Bride would not, yet wanted very much to have the dress. At last
she consented, but the page was to give the Prince a sleeping-draught.

When it was night, and the youth was already asleep, she was led into
the chamber. She seated herself on the bed and said, “I have followed
you for seven years. I have been to the Sun and the Moon, and the
Four Winds, and have inquired for you and have helped you against the
Dragon. Will you, then, forget me?”

But the Prince slept so soundly that it only seemed to him as if the
wind were whistling outside in the fir-trees. When therefore day broke,
she was led out again, and had to give up the golden dress. And as that
had been of no avail, she was sad, went out into a meadow, sat down
there, and wept.

While she was sitting there, she thought of the egg which the Moon had
given her. She opened it, and there came out a clucking hen with twelve
chickens all of gold. They ran about chirping, and crept again under
the old hen’s wings. Nothing more beautiful was ever seen in the world!

She arose, and drove them through the meadow. The Bride looked out of
the window, and the little chickens pleased her so that she came down
and asked if they were for sale.

“Not for money or land, but for flesh and blood. Let me sleep again in
the chamber where the Bridegroom sleeps.”

The Bride said, “Yes,” intending to cheat her as on the former evening.
But when the Prince went to bed he asked the page what the murmuring
and rustling in the night had been. On this the page told all; that he
had been forced to give him a sleeping-draught, because a poor girl had
slept secretly in the chamber, and that he was to give him another that
night.

The Prince said, “Pour out the draught by the bedside.”

At night, she was again led in, and when she began to relate how ill
all had fared with her, he immediately recognized his beloved wife by
her voice, sprang up and cried, “Now I really am released! I have been
as it were in a dream, for the strange Princess has bewitched me so
that I have been compelled to forget you! But God has delivered me from
the spell at the right time.”

Then they both left the castle secretly in the night, for they feared
the father of the Princess, who was a sorcerer. They seated themselves
on the Griffin which bore them across the Red Sea. When they were in
the midst of it, she let fall the nut. Immediately a tall nut-tree grew
up, whereon the bird rested, and then carried them home, where they
found their child, who had grown tall and beautiful.

And they lived thenceforth happily until their death.




[Illustration]

