# THE LITTLE HOUSE IN THE WOOD


A poor woodcutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little
hut on the edge of a lonely wood. One morning as he was about to go to
his work, he said to his wife, “Let my dinner be brought into the wood
to me by my eldest daughter, or I shall never get my work done. And in
order that she may not miss her way,” he added, “I will take a bag of
millet with me and strew the seeds on the path.”

When, therefore, the sun was just above the centre of the wood, the
girl set out on her way with a bowl of soup. But the field-sparrows,
and wood-sparrows, larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked
up the millet long before, and the girl could not find the track. Then
trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank and night
began to fall. The trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and
she began to be afraid.

Then in the distance she perceived a light which glimmered between the
trees. “There ought to be some people living there, who can take me in
for the night,” thought she, and went up to the light. It was not long
before she came to a house the windows of which were all lighted up.

She knocked, and a rough voice from the inside cried, “Come in.”

The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked at the door of the
room. “Just come in,” cried the voice.

And when she opened the door, an old gray-haired man was sitting at the
table, supporting his face with both hands, and his white beard fell
down over the table almost as far as the ground. By the stove lay three
animals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow.

The girl told her story to the Old Man, and begged for shelter for the
night. The man said:

    “_Pretty little Hen,
      Pretty little Cock,
      And pretty brindled Cow,
      What say ye all now?_”

“_Duks,_” answered the animals, and that must have meant, “We are
willing,” for the Old Man said, “Here you shall have shelter and food.
Go to the fire, and cook us our supper.”

The girl found in the kitchen abundance of everything and cooked a good
supper, but had no thought of the animals. She carried the full dishes
to the table, seated herself by the gray-haired man, ate and satisfied
her hunger.

When she had had enough, she said, “But now I am tired. Where is there
a bed in which I can lie down, and sleep?” The animals replied:

    “_Thou hast eaten with him,
      Thou hast drunk with him,
      Thou hast had no thought for us,
      So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night._”

Then said the Old Man, “Just go up-stairs, and you will find a room
with two beds. Shake them up, and put white linen on them, and then I,
too, will come and lie down to sleep.”

The girl went up, and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheets
on, she lay down in one of them without waiting any longer for the Old
Man.

After some time, however, the gray-haired man came, took his candle,
looked at the girl and shook his head. When he saw that she had fallen
into a sound sleep, he opened a trap-door, and let her down into the
cellar.

Late at night, the woodcutter came home, and reproached his wife for
leaving him to hunger all day. “It is not my fault,” she replied, “the
girl went out with your dinner, and must have lost herself, but she is
sure to come back to-morrow.”

The woodcutter, however, arose before dawn to go into the wood, and
requested that the second daughter should take him his dinner that day.
“I will take a bag with lentils,” said he; “the seeds are larger than
millet. The girl will see them better, and can’t lose her way.”

At dinner-time, therefore, the girl took out the food, but the lentils
had disappeared. The birds of the wood had picked them up as they had
done the day before, and had left none.

The girl wandered about in the wood until night, and then she too
reached the house of the Old Man, was told to go in, and begged for
food and a bed. The man with the white beard again asked the animals:

     “_Pretty little Hen,_
      _Pretty little Cock,_
      _And pretty brindled Cow,_
      _What say ye all now?_”

The animals again replied “_Duks_.” And everything happened just as it
had happened the day before. The girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank
with the Old Man, and did not concern herself about the animals, and
when she inquired about her bed, they answered:

     “_Thou hast eaten with him,_
      _Thou hast drunk with him,_
      _Thou hast had, no thought for us,_
      _So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night._”

When she was asleep the Old Man came, looked at her, shook his head,
and let her down into the cellar.

On the third morning, the woodcutter said to his wife, “Send our
youngest child out with my dinner to-day, she has always been good and
obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not run about after
every wild bumblebee, as her sisters did.”

The mother did not want to do it, and said, “Am I to lose my dearest
child, as well?”

“Have no fear,” he replied, “the girl will not go astray; she is too
prudent and sensible. Besides, I will take some peas with me, and strew
them about. They are still larger than lentils, and will show her the
way.”

But when the girl went out with her basket on her arm, the wood-pigeons
had already got all the peas in their crops, and she did not know which
way to turn. She was full of sorrow and never ceased to think how
hungry her father would be, and how her good mother would grieve, if
she did not return home.

At length, when it grew dark, she saw the light and came to the house
in the wood. She begged quite prettily to be allowed to spend the night
there. And the man with the white beard once more asked his animals:

    “_Pretty little Hen,
      Pretty little Cock,
      And pretty brindled Cow,
      What say ye all now?_”

“_Duks_,” said they. Then the girl went to the stove where the animals
were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and stroked their smooth
feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled cow between her horns.

And when, in obedience to the Old Man’s orders, she had made ready some
good soup, and the bowl was placed upon the table, she said, “Am I to
eat as much as I want, and the good animals to have nothing? Outside is
food in plenty, I will look after them first.”

So she went and brought some barley and strewed it for the cock and
hen, and a whole armful of sweet-smelling hay for the cow. “I hope you
will like it, dear Animals,” said she, “and you shall have a refreshing
draught in case you are thirsty.”

Then she fetched in a bucketful of water, and the cock and hen jumped
on to the edge of it and dipped their beaks in. Then held up their
heads as the birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow also took a
hearty draught.

When the animals were fed, the girl seated herself at the table by the
Old Man, and ate what he had left. It was not long before the cock and
the hen began to thrust their heads beneath their wings, and the eyes
of the cow likewise began to blink. Then said the girl, “Ought we not
to go to bed?”

    “_Pretty little Hen,
      Pretty little Cock,
      And pretty brindled Cow,
      What say ye all now?_”

The animals answered “_Duks_.”

    “_Thou hast eaten with us,
      Thou hast drunk with us,
      Thou hast had kind thought for all of us,
      We wish thee good-night._”

Then the girl went up-stairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid clean
sheets on them. And when she had done it the Old Man came and lay down
on one of the beds, and his white beard reached down to his feet. The
girl lay down on the other, said her prayers, and fell asleep.

She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise in the
house that she awoke. There was a sound of cracking and splitting in
every corner. The doors sprang open, and beat against the walls. The
beams groaned as if they were being torn out of their joints. It seemed
as if the staircase were falling down. And at length there was a crash
as if the entire roof had fallen in.

As, however, all grew quiet once more, and the girl was not hurt, she
stayed quietly lying where she was, and fell asleep again. But when she
woke up in the morning with the brilliancy of the sunshine, what did
her eyes behold?

She was lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with
royal splendor. On the walls, golden flowers grew up on a ground of
green silk. The bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet, and on
a chair close by, was a pair of shoes embroidered with pearls.

The girl believed that she was in a dream, but three richly clad
attendants came in, and asked what orders she would like to give?

“If you will go,” she replied, “I will get up at once and make ready
some soup for the Old Man, and then I will feed the pretty little hen,
and the cock, and the beautiful brindled cow.”

She thought the Old Man was up already, and looked round at his bed.
He, however, was not lying in it, but a stranger.

And while she was looking at him, and becoming aware that he was young
and handsome, he awoke, sat up in bed, and said, “I am a King’s Son,
and was enchanted by a wicked Witch, and made to live in this wood, as
an old gray-haired man. No one was allowed to be with me but my three
attendants in the form of a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow. The spell
was not to be broken until a girl came to us, whose heart was so good
that she showed herself full of love, not only toward mankind, but
toward animals--and that you have done, and by you, at midnight, we
were set free, and the old house in the wood was changed back again
into my royal palace.”

And when they had arisen, the King’s Son ordered the three attendants
to set out and fetch the father and mother of the girl to the marriage
feast.

“But where are my two sisters?” inquired the girl.

“I have locked them in the cellar, and to-morrow they shall be led into
the wood, and shall live as servants to a charcoal-burner, until they
have grown kinder, and do not leave poor animals to suffer hunger.”




[Illustration]

