# THE SPINDLE, THE SHUTTLE, AND THE NEEDLE


There was once a girl whose father and mother died while she was still
a little child. All alone, in a small house at the end of the village,
dwelt her godmother, who supported herself by spinning, weaving, and
sewing. The old woman took the forlorn child to live with her, kept her
to her work, and educated her in all that is good.

When the girl was fifteen, the old woman became ill, called the child
to her bedside, and said, “Dear Daughter, I feel my end drawing near.
I leave you the little house, which will protect you from wind and
weather, and my spindle, shuttle, and needle, with which you can earn
your bread.”

Then she laid her hands on the girl’s head, blessed her, and said,
“Only preserve the love of God in your heart, and all will go well with
you.”

Thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she was laid in the earth, the
maiden followed the coffin, weeping bitterly, and paid her the last
mark of respect.

And now the maiden lived quite alone in the little house, and was
industrious, and span, wove, and sewed, and the blessing of the good
old woman was on all that she did. It seemed as if the flax in the room
increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove a piece of cloth
or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once found a buyer who paid
her amply for it. So that she was in want of nothing, and even had
something to share with others.

About this time, the Son of the King was traveling about the country
looking for a Bride. He was not to choose a poor one, and did not
want to have a rich one. So he said, “She shall be my wife who is the
poorest, and at the same time the richest.”

When he came to the village where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he
did wherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl in
the place? They first named the richest; the poorest, they said, was
the girl who lived in the small house quite at the end of the village.

The rich girl was sitting in all her splendor before the door of her
house, and when the Prince approached her, she got up, went to meet
him, and made him a low curtsey. He looked at her, said nothing, and
rode on.

When he came to the house of the poor girl, she was not standing at
the door, but sitting in her little room. He stopped his horse, and
saw, through the window on which the bright sun was shining, the girl
sitting at her spinning-wheel, busily spinning. She looked up, and when
she saw that the Prince was gazing in, blushed all over her face, let
her eyes fall, and went on spinning. I do not know whether, just at
that moment, the thread was quite even; but she went on spinning until
the King’s Son had ridden away again.

Then she stepped to the window, opened it, and said, “It is so warm in
this room!” but she still looked after him as long as she could see the
white feathers in his hat. Then she sat down to work again in her own
room and went on with her spinning. And a saying which the old woman
had often repeated when she was sitting at her work, came into her
mind, and she sang these words to herself:

    “_Spindle, my Spindle, haste, haste thee away,
      Here to my house bring the wooer, I pray._”

And what do you think happened? The spindle sprang out of her hand in
an instant, and out of the door. And when, in her astonishment, she got
up and looked after it, she saw that it was dancing out merrily into
the open country, and drawing a shining golden thread after it. Before
long, it had entirely vanished from her sight.

As she had now no spindle, the girl took the weaver’s shuttle in her
hand, sat down to her loom, and began to weave.

The spindle, however, danced continually onward, and just as the thread
came to an end, reached the Prince.

“What do I see?” he cried; “the spindle certainly wants to show me the
way!” He turned his horse about, and rode back with the golden thread.
The girl was, however, sitting at her work singing:

    “_Shuttle, my Shuttle, weave well this day,
      And guide the wooer to me, I pray._”

Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the door.
Before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet which was
more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet beheld. Lilies and
roses blossomed on both sides of it. And on a golden ground in the
centre green branches ascended, under which bounded hares and rabbits.
Stags and deer stretched their heads in between them. Brightly-colored
birds were sitting in the branches above. They lacked nothing but the
gift of song. The shuttle leapt hither and thither, and everything
seemed to grow of its own accord.

As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew. She held the
needle in her hand and sang:

    “_Needle, my Needle, sharp-pointed and fine,
      Prepare for a wooer this house of mine._”

Then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhere about
the room as quick as lightning. It was just as if invisible spirits
were working. They covered tables and benches with green cloth in an
instant, and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silken
curtains.

Hardly had the needle put in the last stitch, than the maiden saw
through the window the white feathers of the Prince, whom the spindle
had brought thither by the golden thread. He alighted, stepped over the
carpet into the house, and when he entered the room, there stood the
maiden in her poor garments, but she shone out from them like a rose
surrounded by leaves.

“You are the poorest and also the richest,” said he to her. “Come with
me, you shall be my Bride.”

She did not speak, but she gave him her hand. Then he kissed her, and
led her forth, lifted her on to his horse, and took her to the royal
castle, where the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings.

The spindle, shuttle, and needle were preserved in the
treasure-chamber, and held in great honor.




[Illustration]

