So I came up with the idea of this book the other day as I was meditating after
performing the Wim Hof breathing exercises. The idea for this story has been
around me since college, and I have even dabbled with excerpts for it at that
time that probably don't exist anymore, or if they do they exist in the depths
of my hard drive somewhere next to my journal article expressing my contempt
towards the schooling system. Regardless, the idea is thus.

I want to write a book centered on the theme of the realm of heaven in the days
before the fall of Satan and the creation of Hell. In the lore of Christianity,
there is an eternal time before the fall of man and before the fall of Satan
where the heavenly beings existed in their eternal realm in harmony with each
other. The reason I find this time interesting is because there is very little
in literature or scripture written about it. It's alluded to in the bible as
well as in works such as Paradise Lost, but those works are concerned with the
creation of man and of man's role in the context of the heavenly realm.
Paradise Lost speaks of the fall of Satan, but there are very few verses
written dedicated to the time before the fall. However, that time is eternal.
This fact leads well to giving any author creative freedom to create any world
whatsoever as he sees fit, without fear of conflicting with current lore in any
significant way.

An idea I have had would be to retell the story of the fall of satan, but
instead have Satan win the heavenly war, but I have decided to refrain from
this approach for the main reason that it is very contrived, and while it does
allow for creative freedom in the sense that I am doing away with current lore,
it would simply go through in the cosmos of our own human existance as simply a
cute idea that some people might find interesting, but would not have any
lasting impact on how we as humans think or feel.

So that being said, I do feel it is important to understand that I do not want
to take the lore of Christianity as scripture in the writing of my story (no
pun intended, as hard as that is to believe). Rather, I want to be able to talk
of characters and places, and have their story be consistent internally with my
story, but I do not want to be concerned with how my story fits in the story of
Christianity as everyone knows.

This is a tricky subject. One could see my work as a sort of "fan fiction" of
Christianity, similar to the way one could write about the foundation of
Hogwarts in the Harry Potter universe entirely independently of Rowling and
publish it in a similar way. However, since Christanity, and any lore really,
is more of a living and breathing thing, with works that continue to add to the
whole of it across generations of human beings, it becomes gray what adds to
the lore and what is simply fan fiction. To that I say, I wish to create a
story in the Christianity universe, and any contradictions it may have with
existing lore simply contributes to the whole host of contradictions that
already exist in the lore. I would like to think of my work as an expansion and
updating of the current lore of Christanity rather than as an auxillary
fantasy.

With that out of the way, I want to begin to discuss some of the ideas I have
had for this story.

The first idea I have had, and I have had this idea since the inception of this
book in my head, was the idea of "headless angels". These are angels which, in
their society, have had no use for flight in many years, and have forgotten the
art, and in order to "jump start" their re learning of it, will willingly
impale themselves through the skull to remove their fears and inhibitions of
it, and with this gone, their natural instincts will be the only thing to guide
them, thus allowing them to fly again. This action is usually only done for one
of two reasons. One is as an act of desperation in allowing themselves to do
what is necessary for what they believe to be right. This plays on the theme of
sacrifice. The second is those who do it voluntarily, for whatever selfish or
altruistic purpose they believe will allow them to carry out their role in
existance to the best of their ability.

When I first conceived of this idea, it was with the notion that the process is
irreversable. However, thinking on it now, I feel it would be a better
literarry tool if the angels had the ability to do so temporarily, losing only
a part of themselves in the process, but evenutally being able to recover from
the event.

The vision I have for this process in that of an angel, perhaps in a
ritualistic manner, or in a manner of haste, taking a dagger or otherwise
deadly item, and thrusting upward through their throat under their chin and
back along the brain stem of their spinal column, into their brain. While there
are certainly some details to be ironed out, not the least of which is asking
the question of Angelic anatomy, but also such things as whether blade remains
or is removed, and whether the wounds caused heal immediately or persist for
eternity, the concept is there, and I feel that it can be a central theme in
the story telling.

Having now begun to talk of actually creating the book, I have come up with
another central theme of the story, and that is the concept of eternity. I
would like, in whatever way I could, to create this world in a way in which
everything lives for eternity. In this way, living things are neither created
or destroyed, and the only thing that changes is the ebb and flow of the
reality of characters.

Having said that, I do want to keep the concepts of life and death, but instead
of speaking of it as a binary state of being, with a character being either
alive or dead at a given moment as is the case in our reality, I would rather
let the concept be a sort of spectrum, with concepts of charcters that are
full of life versus those that are void of it, and all of those inbetween. This
also goes very well with the concept of the headlessness, with such angels
sacrificing some of their life to reach a state of heigntened physical
capability. Again, this is a concept that requires ironing, as to say life in
this universe is akin to a health bar in a video game would be uninspired, but
the concept is there for me to play with.

Another concept that has to be reasoned about is that of other varities of
beings in this universe. Obviously, angels are the number one concept that I
have conceived at this point, but I'm not sure what to do about other
characters such as God or The Spirit. Not only that, but I would like to
include some of my own creation as well, for there is no reason to restrict
myself to the imaginary beings already existing in the lore, and alas, due to
the nature of the work I am creating, I would very much like to extend the lore
of Christanity to include other beings. These beings, though, won't neccesarily
be pivitol to the whole work of Christianity as we know it today, obviously
they cannot be, but instead I could say that they just simply haven't been
explored yet in the current lore.

The first concept I have is that of an "Immortal". In this context, an immortal
would simply be a sort of statue, much larger than angels or the other beings,
always still and only roused to action when absolutely neccesary. I imagine
these immortals as guardians or gatekeepers, always remaining outside the
realms of the quarells of those around him and instead only fullfilling their
duties as need be. They have no wants and no needs, they require nothing and
give nothing. Instead, they only exist. They are neither malovelent nor
merciful, only carrying out their actions as they decide to do so.

At this point, it goes without saying that these Immortals need to be ironed
out as well, and to be totally honest with myself, I might as well put that
qualification on any character concept placed forth in this document so that I
can refrain from contiuing to bring it up from here forward.

At this point I wish to stop speaking of concepts and themes and talk a bit
about the idea of the narrative structure of the story as I have it in my mind
right now. I have very much been inspired by Tolkein's the Lord of the Rings
and would like to create a work similar to that. Of course, I wish to only draw
inspiration from that work, but at this point the narrative structure I have in
my head is very similar to that of the Lord of the Rings.

That being said, while I want to remove some of the concepts of "right" and
"wrong" and "good" and "bad" from the backbone of my story, it becomes
difficult to write in a universe such as this without placing characters in
different camps, and alas, Christanity is already and unfortunately placed in
camps such as these anyway so it is a bit unavoidable. It also becomes
difficult to write a story in this kind of universe without a central
circumstance and conflict to be resolved, and while I want to avoid the pitfall
of a Song of Ice and Fire and ensure that there is a central conflict to center
the narrative on, at this point I only have some fleeting ideas of individual
events within this conflict without having an idea of what the conflict should
be. A great war seems to be the easiest thing to write about, but I want to
create a story that is somehow above the concepts of war and peace. Again, this
goes back to the concept of life and death, and in this universe I want the
concepts of war and peace to be a lot more fluid than in our reality where we
set dates for the beginning and endings of war times.

A core concept I have a bit in my head is the concept of beginning. That is, I
envision a beginning without structure, and the conflict could be the
arrangement of that structure into a heiarchy of existance for different beings
in this universe. In this way, I could have all of the characters begin as
equals in the universe, and tell of God's rise to power as the supreme being in
the realm of heaven. I like that a lot, actually, thinking on it at this
moment. This creates room for conflict that is very organic with the lore of
Christanity.

I would also like to inject a bit of Daoist thought into this universe, by
rethinking what the holy spirit is in terms of the yin and the yang of the
universe. I do want to be clear that I am not creating an avengers
conglomeration of all the superheroes of different mythologies into one work,
that would be silly and would only serve to titilate the fancy of ones
nerdistic fantasies. However, I believe that it is long over due that the lore
of Christanity be updated to more modern times, especially given that it is
still practiced in todays modern world, and that we combine the concepts from
well written and time tested philosophies into our way of thinking today. In
that way, the spirit will be akin to the Dao in that it flows through all
things, and serves as a catalyst for all that moves through the universe I am
creating.

Wisdom without strength is meek, and leads to the path of resentment; force
without guidance is destructive, and leads to the path of ruin. In your quest
for the Yin, always be aware of the evil that seeks to harm, and in your quest
for Yang, seek the guidance of the wise. Develop the Yang so that you may forge
the Yin. Meditate on the Yin so that you may direct the Yang. In a battle of
strength, the Yang will overcome the wisdom into its own nebulous emptiness; in
a battle of wits, the Yin will redirect the force that opposes into its own
oblivion. Either energy in abscence of the other always leads to defeat. Only
in their union can one find fullfillment.

An interesting concept and eclectic saying I just thought of, "the king of the
servant". Alas, every servent has a king, and a king has servents. One always
thinks of a king owning his servents and using them to his own gain, and in the
case of a servent/king relationship such as slavery this relationship is very
eschewed in favor of the king. However, one must rememeber that many times in
this relationship, the servent needs the king just as much as the king needs
the servent, and in that way one can create a symbiotic relationship between
the two that works to highlight the nature of such a bond. Thus, the saying
"the King of the Servent" serves to highlight the fact that a servant has a
king just as much as a king has a servant.

I also like this very much in the context of my story, in the rise of God. I
like the concept of a god that does not request the praise of those below him,
and instead is even unhappy with those that bow to him, not in a malovelant
way, but in a way that would bring him to tears. God's rise to power should
come about as those around him begin to give him praise, while God never
requests or demands praise from those around him.

Another concept for my story would be the concept of two characters able to
combine, physically, in some way. The physical manifestation of this must be
ironed out, and the method of combination should be metephorical in its
telling. In this way, I would like to think of characters such as Yahweh and
God being different characters, Yahweh being the Yang to God's Yin, Yahwah
demanding and requiring the praise of his inferiors, and God refusing outright
that same praise. Perhaps not God but some other name for "the Lord" could be
used, but the concept is there regardless of which name I end up deciding to
attach to it. This also merges some of the concepts of Judaism with
Christanity, again bringing in a more updated version of the religion and
mythology we have today.

This combining of characters could also be used for Satan, Lucifer, Beelzabub,
and etc., with the method of their combination having a gruesome and graphic
representation while the combinations of God and The Lord having more warm and
soothing unions.

I feel it is important to distinguish as well the difference between the
concepts of Yin and Yang vs. Good and Evil. This is where every TED talk
speaker ever jumps for joy and creates a 2 by 2 diagram with axes of Yin and
Yang and Good and Evil. Evil Yang and Good Yin are pretty obvious, the first
being raw force in the path of destruction, such as a terrorist, and the latter
being raw intellegence in the pursuit of healing and restoration, such as a
doctor, but the other diagonal exists as well. The Good Yang is someone that
means well and uses force and application of energy to acheive that end, such
as a soldier fighting for his people, and the Evil Yin would refer to someone
that uses trickery and deception as means to his own selfish ends, such as a
slimy politician. This concept is not very enlightening when put in such simple
terms, but I use it to illustrate the distinction between the Yin/Yang and
Good/Evil balances.

At this exact moment in time I don't have any examples of how this concept
would apply to my story, but I will say that I wish the concepts of Yin and
Yang to be more pivitol as a whole than the concepts of Good and Evil, for two
reasons. The first is that the concepts of Yin and Yang are more important for
self growth than good and evil, for the most well intentioned person in the
world can't acheive anything without the power to do anything about it, but
secondly because the concepts of good and evil are so overplayed in todays
world that people actually believe them to be absolutes in the nature of the
universe, which is, of course, blatantly absurd (the stars care not for labels
such as good and evil) but is unfortanatly what I have to work with. As such, I
wish to keep Yin and Yang as central themes in this work, using them more often
explicitly as neccesary, while keeping the concepts of Good and Evil as more
implicit, mentioning them explicitly when their distinction as seperate
concepts could be blurred otherwise.

--

I have the idea of a villian, (or just character) that acts by putting masks on
to fulfill different roles. In particular, all of the roles he chooses are
sinister in nature, and involve some level of what most would agree could be
called evil in the most vile or sadistic sense. These masks would be masks that
have been hallowed by the gods to contain the soul of that which wears it, and
certain masks have been worn on the bodies of mummfied kings of great political
or xenophobic tyrantical rules, and by harnessing this left over spirit, he is
able to become the fulfillment of that dead king, and continue on the line.

Other masks were worn by long lines of direct royalty in the days of Monarchy,
for the purpose of lies and deceit in the doings of politics, and from Father
to Son, each learning from the power of the mask and ever enhancing it's power
as the bloodline continues, the mask of the Gaul becomes a mask of deception
and cunning, filled with ruthless yet collected energy.


