In there land there was a king. As far as kings go, this king was what his
critics would call "okay", never extraordinary, but still keeping to his kingly
duties and generally doing with kind heart what was expected of him as king. He
was a figurehead for a farming town during a time of peace and prosperity. The
king owned a crown, but he never wore it except to very special occasions where
it was worn as a decorative piece briefly before it is placed to the side.
Things were what any pragmatic observer of the situation would call good.

As all mortal men of this world do, this king began to age, and as he aged he
did not acquire ever a queen to be with. He considered the whole hereditary
monarchy thing that he was born in to to be a foolish way of living, but he
didn't feel so strongly to do anything about it. He was a king after all, and
he was treated very well. But not only did this king feel this way about the
system he was born in, he also considered himself a much more free and
independent individual if he spent his time pursuing other interests besides
those of wedding bells. And he did. This king spent his time being a member of
the people as much as he did being king. It was no secret when the king would
leave the castle, but he would change his dress and appearance dramatically by
removing his pompous make up (which he dreaded having put on him for fourty
minutes each morning) and fixing his attire to be much more pedestrian, but
never peasently. In this way, he would leave his place of living and work and
fraternize with his people. The king was much to busy with his pedestrian
interests, not to mention his obligation to his work, that work being kingly
work but still the same burden of work that all humans are born with, to bother
himself with what he would call his complementary sex. No, women only
interested him sensually and not intellectually, and this man was only
intellectual enough to know that he wasn't intellectual enough to go against
his intellectuality. And going with his intelect, this man became would become
the last of his bloodline of kings, this seeming somehow appropiate to the part
of the king that kept him up at night.

Of course, further thought by the king led him to think that most likely the
next in line of royal blood will be put in his place after his death, and that
some new bloodline will begin. But so be it, the king would say to himself
after coming to this realization. It's the gesture more than the actual result
that concerned him, and the gesture was no cost to his well being, so he might
as well make it even if it didn't make a difference one way or another to his
legacy.

And so the king lived on like this, living with his people in the time that he
wasn't governing the people, and preparing things in order to allow continued
prosperous growth. Under his leadership the people saw continued overall
increase in crop growth, ability of craftsmen went up and their costs of labor
went down, and what was once a road carved by the wheels of the travelers
became smooth clear lines of roadway woven throughout the peoples that lived
on that land.

The people were happy with their king, and the king was happy with his people.
Perhaps too happy. He had reached his end. He saw the people he governed grow
from the innocent beginnings of settlization to a well organized social group,
and he knew the part he had to play in it was no more. He was becoming old, and
weary of this world. The king wanted to gain enjoyment out of the growth he
once knew, but he couldn't knowing that his involvment was being filtered out
and replaced by the very system which he put in place. It was a beautiful
thing, but just because something is beautiful doesn't mean it can't also be
sad.

In his later years, the king grew nihilistic. "Why should I go the extra mile
to govern my people if a mile short will do and I can run two fewer miles than
I would otherwise," would be something the king might say to his trusted
friends in a time of late night inebriation that was becoming only too common.

Of course, the king didn't want to lose interest in the things that once gave
him joy, but old age without a mate was wearing on him, and he began to
realize the error in rejecting a mate earlier in life. He was only too aware of
the pains in his soul that he was missing for not having shared in another
human being his sexual and emotional energy, and more for not having received
that same sexual and emotional energy. Indeed, he knew that the glass that
never receives water sits on the shelf and collects dust, but he didn't realize
the ramifications of that dust until it was only to physically manifest in
himself.

So he would sit there, an old, accomplished, unmarried king, and he would
contemplate his life. He would lose himself in his own thought, revisit past
glories in imagination and reflect on past mistakes in trance. Indeed, he
became more concerned with the world of his imagination than with the world
that he was responsible to, the world we are all responsible to.

This is all well and good when a farmer who shares a similar life passes on the
workings of his labor to an heir and dies peacefully in the care of medical
men, but due to the nature of the Hereditary Monarchy which this king was born
into, his kingly duties were bound to him until his death.

As you may imagine, this caused a good unrest in the people. At first they
could excuse the kings lack of action to a possible slump. Everyone has times
when they lose hope and lose energy in the world, and most that are able to
stick around are able to last through that slump and come out on the other end
rejuvinated and full of life. However, when the king continued to lock himself
in his quarters and only did the minimum of what was required of him by his
people for many a year on end, to the point where this behavior was only
getting worse and not better, the people began to cause unrest.

"Why is our king sitting idly in his quarters while we farmers are waiting for
news which impacts the growth of our crop? What ill have we done to him that he
would rather live isolated apart from that which has been so beneficial to him?
To anything do we owe this king of ours so that he may come out? Can we perhaps
bribe him or otherwise encourage him to return to his duties? For how much
longer should we tolerate this immature and innappropiate behavior?"

These were only a selection of questions that the townspeople had for the king.
And the king, being not totally removed from his people, gave this reply to his
people, "Are you not grateful? Have I not been good to you? The years since I
have sucked my mothers tit I was responsible for your well-being, and your
well-being I kept for many long years since then. Count them! Alas, a farmhand
may have harder work than I, but when he grows old the youth take his role. Not
so for me! I only wish to be free from my burdens so I may pass in peace from
this world, but since my family and my government won't allow that, I ask that
you only give me this one indulgance. Please do not disturb me when I am in
thought, and let me do as I wish as a human being on this planet Earth."

The people, having heard this reply, were taken aback. Indeed, there was
nothing they had done to cause this action by the king, and nothing they could
do to right it. At least so it seemed until, after many fruitless years with
the king in this state, one of the people spoke up.

"There are mountains far to the west of here where a great beast is said to
sleep. It is told that he does not sleep in this world, but in another, and to
wake him we must go to this hallowed place, and perform the ritual taught to us
and practiced to by our forefathers, and by performing such a right at such a
place, we can penetrate the barrier of this world and summon this beast, this
dragon, from the next. Come with me, now, all of you, so we may summon this
dragon and tell him of our plight, for the dragon is said to be wise, and
perhaps he will have the solution to our problems."

At first the people were of course reluctanct to summon a beast from another
world to ours just so they could ask him about our socio-political issues of
the day, but as time grew more and crops grew less, eventually the will of the
mass turned to action.

And so a group of those so inspired, and perhaps a little foolish, consisting
of enlightened farm owners and noblemen of the town, took it upon themselves to
go on a quest into the mountains to the West and summon this beast who may or
may not have answers for them. This band of people, numbered so that each knew
the name of every other but would still be considered a pack, gathered their
belongings, bringing candles and torches and incense of ritual, along with a
sacrifice of their greatest crop and livestock, and took upon themselves to
march Westward into the mountains where this beast, rumored to be a dragon of
yore by some, was said to sleep across this realm and into another.

Their march was as just as eventful as any march of such a number through the
mountains could be. At first, there was a clear path, where those before them
had trod before, and ventured through there to gather herds of animals and
hunts, but as they continued on their journey, their path grew less and less
traveled upon, until the underbrush overcame their path. Some turned back, but
not out of lack of faith, but due to practical reasons of hardship along the
road. However, most carried on, and after multiple risings and settings of the
sun, they arrived at their desired destination.

Indeed, when they made it there, the people only at first saw a clearing in the
trees of the mountains. Peculiar though it was, it was certainly not divine
and could have very easily been the cause of some natural phenomenon. It was
peculiar, though, because this clearing, covered in vine and brush though it
was, made a perfect circle in the trees, so that at it's very center the sun
shone through as if illuminating their destination. Some that saw this at first
felt even a little uneasy in their stomach, and others set their packs down and
came to their knees as if already praying before some imaginary alter that
would fit so perfectly if it were there.

As the people began to investigate the clearing, they became more convinced
that they had arrived at their desired destination. There were a few other
clearings that they had felt could perhaps be their stopping point, but those
had each felt off in some way, and after debate among them they had decided to
move on. This clearing, however, felt more and more correct as the people
continued to investigate, until, after clearing much of the vines and leaves
the people started to uncover some peculiar and even grooves around the edges,
marking a perfect circular ridge that in no way could be the product of nature.
As they continued to look around, they found that under the brush and dirt was
nothing but smooth, level stone, as if it were the floor of a marble castle
that had long been abanoneded but somehow maintained it's polish through the
years. This was the place they were looking for.

Those people continued to clear the brush, until the stone underneath was fully
unearthed, and the ridge around it made a perfect circle, coming up to the
knees of those standing on the outside, and they were able to see faint but
distinct markings designated for the ritual they had only heard about in
stories of lore from their fathers and their father's fathers. Having seen
this, the people their began to unwrap their bags, and arrange the incense and
torches about the wide stone slab in the way that seemed to be guided not by
their own knowledge but knowledge which came from beyond. Acting in unison, as
if driven by some external guiding mind, the people set up their scene until
they were ready to begin their ritual.

Every gathered around and upon the scene, and those around the edges began to
beat their drums. At first the beating was slow, and without rythym, but as if
by instinct the people began to sense the beat and the pulse of the mountains
around them, and with each resounding drum beat, it seemed as though the trees
around them began to respond, and the ground beneath them seemed to agree with
their sounds in a strange and unfamiliar yet calming way that only seemed right
to those in the ceremony. The drum beats grew louder, and while the deeper
drums kept the beat steady, those that were feeling as such began to create
rythym within the resounding beats. Those bearing drums continued in this way,
as if building first from nothing but ever steadily into a crecendo, not a
crecendo that was leading to anything, but a crecendo that only felt right in
the pulse of the mountain around. And then some began to sing. Like the drums,
those that sang at first were cautious, not wanting to disturb the harmony with
the earth that the drummers had established, but as their hums began to grow,
and resonate out towards the heavens, they grew more confident in their humming
and continue as such. The flames of incense continued to burn, and this
crecendo continued without conscious effort of those involved. If they were to
have stopped to think about it, it would have seemed ridiculous, but none of
them stopped to think about it, each simply became a part of the harmony that
was being created, and included their own voice when it felt right. And when it
felt right, they knew it felt right, and they continued on this way, ever
building and evolving towards a climax that none there were overhasty to reach.
Some began to dance with the music, weaving in and out betweeen eachother in
harmony, never stepping on the toes of another but always passing through the
right steps at the right time. None knew from where this inspiration came, and
they all became caught up in the music that each became lost in their trance.

This continued on for some time, every increasing in intensity in beauty as the
time went on, until one among them led their finest calf that had walked with
them through the mountains into the center of the circle. Even this calf had a
sort of steady walk to itself, as if it knew it's place in this noise and knew
where it needed to go. There was no fear, no apprehension, only resolve in the
moment of where it needed to go. This calf was led to the center of the scene,
until the one leading took in his hand his hallowed knife, a knife that had
been passed down through his family for generations and been kept in safe
keeping by the people and had never been touched by flesh nor bone until that
moment, and grasping it firmly within his hand, as the music began to reach a
sort of climax, he thrust it through the calf at the heart, so that his blood
would spill all through the slab, until the stone became soaked in that still
oxygenated blood. At this, the calf was laid gently on its side, and the blood
from the wound spewed forth from the calf, it's bright red glimmering in the
sun which had come up and caused the ground beneath them to glisten in the
magnificent patterns and ridges which were faint at first but grew into a
beautiful network of lines and curves, until the entire stone slab was covered
in this living blood.

All at once the people stopped, they held their torches, and their incense,
they took their drums and instruments, and gathered around the edges, and
became silent, looking upon this scene with wonder, seeing only the man with
the knife and the slaughted calf in the center. This silent lasted only for
a moment, but for the people it felt as though their entire lifetime, and
the lives of their fathers and the lives of their children could have gone by
in that one moment, and at the end of that eternal moment, the one in the
center held up his flame, recited an ancient chant in a tongue that had never
been spoken before, and lowered his flame to the calf, setting it ablaze with
flame. This flame started slowly from the center, but quickly and steadily
grew, acting not as any flame that those people had seen before, until it began
to engulf the entire stone. The one who started the flame at first stood within
it, but as it grew hot he stepped to the edge with his fellow townsfolk, and
gathered with all of them there in the circle.

For a moment, each of the townspeople there looked at one another, each sharing
in their ritual and acknowledging the presence and the magnificence of what
they had done together. The flame continued to grow about the slab, billowing
out from the edges and growing strongest towards the center. The sounds of
winds like mist began to grow, and though the towns people from this point
remained silent in reverence of the act they had just done, the noise began to
grow, and the flames began to swirl. The spiral winds grew stronger and
stronger until the winds began to grow a sort of life of their own, the flames
continued to burn strongly, so much so that the people could no longer look
upon it, and they each in their time began to lower themselves to their knees,
and bow their heads down lest their faces be burned.

And at this, the stone began to rumble, and out of its center came that which
they had come waiting for. The flames shot forth out of the
stone, upward through the clearing in the trees, and with it a mighty roar, deeper and more
majestic than any roar that had been heard to that point, and out of this roar
came first the nostrils of the mighty dragon as he flew out of the stone and
upwards into the sky. No one could see from where the
dragon had appeared from, whether an opening had been made in the stone or not
could not be seen as all there continued to bow their heads out of fear and
reverence for that which they knew was greater than them. This dragon continued
fly out of the stone, with mighty winds and flames that would have taken away
any one person of that group had they not been joined together and braced by
the stone which they were gathered around. The dragon came up and up further
into the sky, through the flames and the winds, spiraling up and up as it's
body like a serpent came entirely out of the stone.

When the dragon had finish its genesis, the flames had been extinguished, and
the winds died down, and the people there could again gather themselves and
evaluate themselves. They had been so lost in their ritual that many of them
had not realized what they had gone through. Some had burns, others had cuts,
other merely bruises, but all continue to stay there, some in shock, some in
awe, some losing themselves, but all keeping their wits about them as they
witnessed the dragon fly above them and circle back around to that hallowed
ritual place. As the dragon flew back down, and began to take his place of
resting coiled around the stone, comfortable atop it's surface, the people
continued to bow their heads low, not knowing what else to do. None were brave
enough to speak the first word or make the first move, and for a moment they
simply continued to sit as they watched the dragon take its place. Many were
also surprised, as they looked up and saw that the dragon, though indeed much
larger and quite longer than any of them as human beings, was of a size that
was reasonable, and when he coiled himself on the stone, they could imagine him
not as a supreme being bigger then themselves but instead as simply another
beast among them. However, they knew better than to underestimate or disrespect
that which they had summoned, espcically after such a ritual, and continued to
sit on their knees with heads bowed low in reverence. It was indeed the dragon
who broke that silence, and spoke the first words.

"What sort of peoples are these, that would dare summon me from my eternal
sleep?"

The dragons voice was bellowing, but not so overwhelming that it couldn't be
understood. It was forceful, and commanded a certain authority that none of
those had felt before. After another long silence, the people, still uneasy,
remained silent.

At that, the dragon blew great flames from his belly, and out his mouth, and
into the sky as if blowing flames that could reach beyond the clouds and even
to the sun. From this breath, echoed his forceful voice again.

"Well?"

At this, one of the people, indeed, the one that slew the calf that began the
flames, rose and spoke, unsure of his words and confidence of the previous
ritual, but still trying to muster in himself something appropiate to say.

"Mighty.... um.... dragon, uh....sir... uh, we summon you because I... I mean,
uh, we... um, wish to, ask your assistance in a great trouble that we as the
memebers of our lowly and humble town have recently come across... well... not
trouble, but, uh, well, we have a problem that we don't know how to.... um" and
he was inturrupted before he could decide between the word "solve" or
"rectify". Indeed, he was almost glad at the inturruption because he felt quite
foolish stammering so, and even rebuked himself for not reherasing his words
more precisely in the time leading up to this point.

"Stop this nonsense! Speak plainly, mortal, for though I am certainly above you
in status you I have no time for your fear or reverence. Address me however you
would address your fellow man and get to your point before I grow impatient of
your yammering."

"Yes, um, of course, uh, dragon... sir. We here have summoned you to ask your
help. Our king, you see, he used to be a good king, but now, well, he is not as
good anymore, and he locks himself in his room and blocks himself off from his
kingly duties. Our leadership has suffered, and our town grows weaker at his...
what's the word...  negligence, you could say, and our townspeople suffer
because of him. We wish your aid in our situation, oh mighty dragon... uh...
one, that you might help us restore our town to it's former..." and he wanted
to use the word "glory", but that word seemed much to innapproiate to use for
the town in the presence of one as mighty as the dragon, so he ended with
"town-ness." At this utterance he felt quite foolish before the dragon, quite
foolish indeed at not only having made up a word so silly as "town-ness" but
also having voiced what seemed at this point quite a trivial matter after the
magnificent ritual that they had just taken part. And before he could stammer
on and correct himself about the use of the word "town-ness" and the trivial
nature of their request, the dragon inturrupted him.

"And what of his heir? Why has he not taken up the kingship?"

And to this the man replied, "Well, you see, that's the thing, is the king
never married, and does not intend to, so there is no rightful heir, and
finding one among us to rule, well, we have not been in this situation before,
and we don't know who will take his place, and it seems wrong to decide that
before the current king is, well... not king, um... dead... I mean, and we wish
to come to a solution before it comes to fighting." And before he could add any
more needless honerifics or useless words to tack on to the end of his
statement, the dragon began.

"I see, I see." There was a moment pause. The people sat in curiosity, waiting
intently for what the dragon would say. And the dragon continued. "I will be
your king. Your present king will go into the forests, and he should find
himself, he should find perspective, he will be relieved of his duties until he
decides he is ready to come back. And though he may be old, he can still find
a wife, and make an heir, and if not, I will rule and maintian peace and order
as you townspeople decide who among you should take his place. Yes, this is how
it will be."

At this the people began to exchange uneasy glances amongst eachother. Of
course, none were willing to speak up at these words of the dragon, and they
continued to sit on their knees around the dragon and bow their heads. Then the
leader, gaining his composure and returning himself to his words, spoke up
again.

"O mighty one, if you will excuse me wasting your time calling you so," he
added only as sardonically as he dared, "We have not come here to act behind
the back of our king and replace him with a divine being. To do so would be,
well, put plainly, quite dastardly, and we are not a dasterdly people but
instead a simple group of farmers that would appreciate if the ordeals of our
town were handled in the most appropiate of manners. We were hoping to seek
your advice in this moment, so that you may return to your eternal sleep, so
that we could hinder you in the least, for I am sure that you are a great beast
and would not want to bother yourself with the bookkeeping affairs of our town.
Noble sir."

The dragon remained still for a moment, for quite a long moment actually, so
long that the people began to look amongst themselves again. The leader of them
continued to stand there, now gaining his confidence and his resolve, and began
to evaluate for himself the might of the dragon that they had summoned, and it
struck him again that this dragon was not immortal but instead simply a beast,
and when he looked at the skin and scales of the beast, he for a fleeting
moment saw the flesh of it and wondered what would happen if he were to draw
his knife and thrust it into the beast so. Of course, he would not think of
doing such a thing, especially not in this moment, but the thought occured to
him that this being could be slain just like any other. However, when he looked
up to the eyes of the beast, he saw a sort of queer emptiness, the sort of
emptiness you would see in an emotionless tyrant before he ordered the
execution of an innocent man, and it made him uneasy to look upon those eyes
for any length of time as they stared back at him, as if staring through his
soul. Indeed, he made eye contact breifly and then glanced away before the
dragon broke the silence again.

"How queer a people you are?" The dragon began, in a voice like one who might
sit in a chair and discuss the wordly issues of the day with his peers in a
contemplative way. "You are a people in a situation so [desperate] as to make a
pilgramage across the mountains and the trees to come to this hallowed place,
only to seek my advice, and after having received it, you choose not to accept
it? If you could have come up with some worldly solution, would you not have
done so been able to apply it without coming to a divine intervention? But now
you have chosen the route of the divine, and some things such as this, once
they are begun, cannot be undone.

"Yes, indeed, you come to me asking for help, but in reality you ask not for
help because you already had in your head what you wanted the answer to be. Why
would you ask a question if you already have the answer? But let me tell you,
you only wanted to come here and disturb me so that I might give you some pill
that your king might swallow so that you can go back to your mundane and
comfortable lives. Listen to me now." The dragon bent his head toward the sky
and let out a great breath that flung fire through the openening and into the
sky. "Listen! In one thing you are correct, I am not concerned with
bookkeeping. Such things bore me, and they serve no purpose. Instead, I will
rule your people and make you a great people under me. Oh, how great it will
be, to bring up a new host again. This will be the way, and though you might
resist it, I tell you truly to look into your heart and discover that it must
be so. Look into your heart and tell me if you do not lust for something more?
Do you not wish to be a great people? And surely you know how far into the
trenches you have dug for yourself you have fallen. You have fallen into the
trenches of your own comfort, and I will pull you out of those trenchs and make
you a great people."

As the dragon finished his words, he sprung up from his coiled sitting
position, and flew up into the air again. He flew into the sky and circled
above the clouds, weaving his path in and out of his own tail, creating a
mesmerizing effect in any who watched, as he would glide with grace about the
winds and the air. The people looked up and watched. They began to stare and to
watch the dragon as he flew above them, and in their hearts they saw the
playfulness of the dragon. He would weave himself, and create patterns, but he
would break apart those patterns in his flight, and dodge himself. As the
people looked up, they felt a little apprension and fear for this beast, but
mostly they felt awe as they watched him move effortlessly through the air.
After a time, the dragon returned to the people, came back down to his perch,
and spoke again.

"Yes, come, play with me. Though I do not often stand to have any other
creature step upon me, I give this to you in this time. Step on my back, and
behold in the glory that is the world. Share with me in admiration as I take
you into the clouds and show you the beauty that is everything that is and
everything that could be. Let me not tell, but show, what I have to offer you."

The dragon laid himself out, presenting himself for the people to ride upon,
and timid at first, the people first began to touch him, and some of the most
brave among them began to hop on, but some still waited and would not arrive on
his back. The dragon let out a great laugh, a playful laugh that can not be
mistaken for anything but jovial, and in his laugh he sighed, saying, "Hop on,
don't be scared, I don't have time for your antics. Hurry, while I still offer
you this chance to soar with me in the sky. I will ensure that none of you
fall, you take me as so unskilled in flight as to let you die from my back?
Step on!"

At these words, those that were timid began to gather in themselves
the courage to step on the dragon's back as all the others there had done so,
and when each one had hopped on and secured himself and grasped a hold of some
scale or spine or anything else to grab hold of, the dragon took flight. He
went up abruptly steep at first so as to clear the opening in the trees, but
slowly as to make sure the people could hold on, and when he could level out,
he gathered his speed, and began to steadily rise. The wind blew through the
hair of the people, and the cold air began to sting their eyes and make them
water as the dragon rose, but that did not stop them from taking in the moment.
They soared into the sky on the back of the dragon, and for the first time they
were able to see the whole of the earth, the grass and the mountains and the
trees, and they were able to see it all as they had never seen before. They had
seen landscapes from the tops of mountains, but never were they able to see the
tops of mountains from the sky. They looked and as far as the eye could see
there was nothing but beautiful landscape, and they were each in turn overtaken
by it's beauty, and in that moment nothing mattered to them, and they lost
their whole sense of time as they all simply took in the moment in what was,
for them, the first and only time they would ever be able to see the world in
this way.

All too soon, the dragon began to circle back to their town. He made his
descent into their town, and made his rest just on the outskirts, near their
humble cottages, and after he made his rest, he spoke again to the people.
"Listen to my words now. Though you were fearful, you excersized your trust.
You stepped on my back, and I have taken you and shown you the beauty and
greatness of all the world. It is that trust you should show me now, as I take
you not as individuals, but as a nation, into greatness, and let me bear you
and lead you in my way."

In awe of their recent flight, the people could do nothing but agree. They went
at once to their king, almost giddy from their recent flight, and told him of
the dragon and his plan.

"Great king, we have wonderful news. 

--At this point, the people will talk to the king and tell them of the plan,
and the dragon will begin to rule. I will then fastforward some number of
years, to a point where the people, though they have made well for themselves,
have maybe had a bad crop, and they grow tired of paying tribute to the dragon,
and though the dragon tries to reason with them, they begin to rebel as the
king has not yet returned, and the dragon kills them and etc.


