In that time there was a land known to those that dwelt in it as Eorzea, Land
of the Escape, where all those who could not find their place in their dwelling
would come to discover wonderous beings of fantasy and magic that they would do
battle against both alone and with others in that realm, and in so doing find
in themselves purpose and meaning to their otherwise fruitless lives. One such
individual was known as Delita, named after the hero of Ivalice of which Eorzea
was like a cousin, but having no relation to the hero finding himself at first
as all others in that world naked save the clothing on his back and the role
decided upon him. And of his roles Delita would choose the role of the
Gladiator, sturdy and strong against all foes, always aiming to draw them to
his threats and in so doing absorbing their blows with both grace and
steadiness, so that his companions might destroy them with their mighty attacks
both from afar and by his side, un-impaired by the damage they might bring to
them lest the mighty Gladitor lose the threat upon which he drew from his
enemies.

And so it began, not as the beginning of the life of the one who came there,
but instead of the beginning of a life anew, Delita Webster. This is his tale.

His tale begins as all others in that world, as the slow but steady merging of
his spirit from the world outside to the world within, always growing stronger
and more steadfast in his ways. He would journey solo, helping the townspeople
and villagers of Eorzea as he may, harnessing his skills and refining his
techniques, never concerning himself with purpose for any of it beside the ever
onward pursuit of bettering oneself. And in this journey he would find other
adventurors, like himself, each with their own path in the world of Eorzea. And
at first these meetings were short, each adventurer having their own reason for
completing the task assigned to them, but always working in unison with their
companions, and while the intersection of their paths may be short, each such
encounter served to aid Delita in his quest to become a better version of
himself with each task completed, always learning something from the encounter
and finding ways to refine and master his skills as one that receives the
blows of his enemies.

Ever vigilant in his quest to reach the height of his skill, always thirsting
to defeat more challenging and worthy foes, every adventurer must complete a
sort of coming of age, each unique to the role they choose at the beginning,
and Delita was no exception. And in his time, for his time short in his
determination and steadiness, Delita would learn the ways of the Paladin,
taking oath of both Sheild and Sword to come to the end of the first stage of
his journey at the Praterium, where all such adventures would find the complete
expression of their skills and utilize for their first into an encounter of
relative ease of that which lay before them, a sort of entry into their coming
to adulthood. And Delita made no short work of this initial journey, completing
more quickly than most, and without shortcut, as he eagerly awaited that which
was to follow.

--

Not long after the completion of the first journey of his new spirit, Delita
would sit and wonder what was to be his next step on his adventure. In doing
so, he would best many new enemies, called Primals in that world, beings of
great difficulty, but he would feel useless as others would take on the primary
roles of defeating them. In that time of new entry to adulthood, Delita would
later learn of the raids that the adventures of Eorzea would partake in, and
in these raids he would learn of the legendary and long sought after gear that
those forturate enough to call themselves victors of such raids would receive,
and Delita, feeling small and ill equipped in comparison, at that time knew not
of the hardships of those that decided to take on these tasks, and wished
himself to step on his path towards such pursuits.

In this way, Delita stumbled upon his first Free Company, being named the
Phoenix Rising, order of the Phoenix, in the realm of Jenova which was his
corner of Eorzea. This Free Company was humble in its origins, and open in its
recruitment, allowing all who desired to join to be let into its ranks, for at
the time Delita knew not of any other, and though he considered that this group
of individuals might not match his particular goals, Delita desired to become
strong in the land in whatever way seemed correct to him, choosing to take some
action as such rather than no action at all.

His journies in this free company were short, and uneventful, but in it Delita
found many companions, some with slight skill in their respective roles, but
most with quirky, playful and social attitudes, each taking to the land of
Eorzea with their own humble dealings, not desiring the lofty goals of Delita
but being content in their path, whatsoever that path may be. Of these
companions, Delita would not make future contact with in his deeper journies
beyond the his initial coming of age, but of fond memories does he have of one
calling himself Xemnas, with which he began his first steps as a humble raider.

It was in this time that Delita learned of the state of the world of Eorzea. It
so happened that, in the time before Delita, in the long dealings of those
that came before him, the raiders of Eorzea had bested the king of dragons
Bahamut, and having defeated such a foe, the raiders were sitting in
anticipation of new talents and skills that would await them in their future
journey called Heavensward, where the mighty being Alexander would manipulate
both time and space to attempt to bring the raiders to their defeat in the same
way that Bahumut might. Of the lore behind these being Delita concerned himself
not with, but learning of the expansion of their lore and adventures, Delita
elected to take the lead in exploring the new worlds, so that he might become
strong in the world that promised now trials and tribulations that none knew
what might behold them.

And in that time, the gates of the northern lands of Coerthas were opened, and
many adventurers set out on their new journey, each seeing and mastering new
skills and talents not before known to any, and using these new talents, were
able to best the foes, the primals Ravana and Bismarck, and came upon a sort of
second coming of age, a new beginning to their adventures.

Delita, being ever eager to learn and acquire the gear and talents required to
become the strongest version of himself that he could be, set out eagerly to
become one of the leaders in this new adventure, and in so doing became strong
in the ways of the Paladin before any other before him might.

